Chemistry
Seventh Edition

Steven S. Zumdahl
University of Illinois

Susan A. Zumdahl
University of Illinois

Houghton Mifﬂin Company Boston New York

Executive Editor: Richard Stratton
Developmental Editor: Rebecca Berardy Schwartz
Senior Project Editor: Cathy Labresh Brooks
Editorial Assistant: Susan Miscio
Senior Art & Design Coordinator: Jill Haber
Composition Buyer: Chuck Dutton
Manufacturing Coordinator: Renee Ostrowski
Senior Marketing Manager: Katherine Greig
Marketing Assistant: Naveen Hariprasad

Cover image: Masaaki Kazama/Photonica

Photo credits: Page A39.

Copyright © 2007 by Houghton Mifﬂin Company. All rights reserved.
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage
or retrieval system without the prior written permission of Houghton Mifﬂin Company
unless such copying is expressly permitted by federal copyright law. Address inquiries to
College Permissions, Houghton Mifﬂin Company, 222 Berkeley Street, Boston, MA
02116-3764.

Printed in the U.S.A.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2005929890

Student edition:
ISBN 13: 978-0-618-52844-8
ISBN 10: 0-618-52844-X
Instructor’s Annotated Edition:
ISBN 13: 978-0-618-52845-5
ISBN 10: 0-618-52845-8
Advanced Placement edition:
ISBN 13: 978-0-618-71370-7
ISBN 10: 0-618-71370-0
123456789-WEB-09 08 07 06 05

Contents

To the Professor ix
To the Student xv

3.3 The Mole

1 Chemical Foundations 1
1.1 Chemistry: An Overview

3.4 Molar Mass

2

5

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT A Note-able Achievement 7
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Critical Units! 8

1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7

Units of Measurement 8
Uncertainty in Measurement 10
Signiﬁcant Figures and Calculations
Dimensional Analysis 16
Temperature 19

3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9

13

3.10 Calculations Involving a Limiting Reactant 106
For Review 113 • Key Terms 113 • Questions and
Exercises 115

25

For Review 29 • Key Terms 29 • Questions and
Exercises 30

2 Atoms, Molecules, and Ions 38
2.1 The Early History of Chemistry

39

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT There’s Gold in Them There Plants! 40

2.2 Fundamental Chemical Laws 41
2.3 Dalton’s Atomic Theory 43
2.4 Early Experiments to Characterize the Atom

45

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Berzelius, Selenium, and Silicon 46

2.5 The Modern View of Atomic Structure:
An Introduction 49
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Reading the History of Bogs 51

2.6 Molecules and Ions 52
2.7 An Introduction to the Periodic Table

55

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Hassium Fits Right in 57

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

Percent Composition of Compounds 89
Determining the Formula of a Compound 91
Chemical Equations 96
Balancing Chemical Equations 98
Stoichiometric Calculations: Amounts of Reactants and
Products 102
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT High Mountains—Low
Octane 103

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Faux Snow 22

1.8 Density 24
1.9 Classiﬁcation of Matter

86

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Measuring the Masses of Large
Molecules, or Making Elephants Fly 87

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Chemistry of Art 4

1.2 The Scientiﬁc Method

82

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Elemental Analysis Catches
Elephant Poachers 84

57

For Review 67 • Key Terms 67 • Question and
Exercises 69

3 Stoichiometry 76
3.1 Counting by Weighing 77
3.2 Atomic Masses 78
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Buckyballs Teach Some History 80

4 Types of Chemical Reactions and
Solution Stoichiometry

126

4.1 Water, the Common Solvent 127
4.2 The Nature of Aqueous Solutions: Strong and Weak
Electrolytes 129
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Arrhenius: A Man with
Solutions 132

4.3 The Composition of Solutions

133

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Tiny Laboratories 138

4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9

Types of Chemical Reactions 140
Precipitation Reactions 140
Describing Reactions in Solution 145
Stoichiometry of Precipitation Reactions
Acid–Base Reactions 149
Oxidation–Reduction Reactions 154

147

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Iron Zeroes in on
Pollution 156
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Pearly Whites 159
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Aging: Does It Involve
Oxidation? 160

4.10 Balancing Oxidation–Reduction
Equations 162
For Review 168 • Key Terms 168 • Questions and
Exercises 170

iii

7 Atomic Structure and Periodicity 274
7.1 Electromagnetic Radiation

275

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Flies That Dye 277

7.2 The Nature of Matter

277

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Chemistry That Doesn’t Leave You in
the Dark 280
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Thin Is In 282

7.3 The Atomic Spectrum of Hydrogen
7.4 The Bohr Model 285

284

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Fireworks 288

7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
7.9
7.10

5 Gases 178
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5

7.11 The Aufbau Principle and the Periodic Table 302
7.12 Periodic Trends in Atomic Properties 309
7.13 The Properties of a Group: The Alkali Metals 314
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Potassium—Too Much of a Good
Thing Can Kill You 317

For Review 318 • Key Terms 318 • Questions and
Exercises 320

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Separating Gases 196
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Chemistry of Air Bags 197

The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases 199
Effusion and Diffusion 206
Real Gases 208
Characteristics of Several Real Gases 210
Chemistry in the Atmosphere 211
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Acid Rain: A Growing Problem 212

8.1 Types of Chemical Bonds

330

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT No Lead Pencils 332

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Firewalking: Magic or Science? 241

Hess’s Law 242
Standard Enthalpies of Formation
Present Sources of Energy 252
New Energy Sources 256

8.11 Exceptions to the Octet Rule 358
8.12 Resonance 362
8.13 Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

6 Thermochemistry 228
6.1 The Nature of Energy 229
6.2 Enthalpy and Calorimetry 235
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Nature Has Hot Plants 238

Electronegativity 333
Bond Polarity and Dipole Moments 335
Ions: Electron Conﬁgurations and Sizes 338
Energy Effects in Binary Ionic Compounds 342
Partial Ionic Character of Covalent Bonds 346
The Covalent Chemical Bond: A Model 347
Covalent Bond Energies and Chemical Reactions 350
The Localized Electron Bonding Model 353
Lewis Structures 354
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Nitrogen Under Pressure 358

246

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Farming the Wind 258

iv

8 Bonding: General Concepts 328

8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
8.7
8.8
8.9
8.10

For Review 215 • Key Terms 215 • Questions and
Exercises 217

6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6

290

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Growing Periodic Table 302

Pressure 179
The Gas Laws of Boyle, Charles, and Avogadro 181
The Ideal Gas Law 186
Gas Stoichiometry 190
Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures 194

5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5.10

The Quantum Mechanical Model of the Atom
Quantum Numbers 293
Orbital Shapes and Energies 295
Electron Spin and the Pauli Principle 296
Polyelectronic Atoms 298
The History of the Periodic Table 299

367

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Veggie Gasoline? 262

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Chemical Structure and
Communication: Semiochemicals 378

For Review 264 • Key Terms 264 • Questions and
Exercises 265

For Review 380 • Key Terms 380 • Questions and
Exercises 382

9 Covalent Bonding: Orbitals 390
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5

Hybridization and the Localized Electron Model 391
The Molecular Orbital Model 403
Bonding in Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules 406
Bonding in Heteronuclear Diatomic Molecules 412
Combining the Localized Electron and Molecular
Orbital Models 413
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT What’s Hot? 414

For Review 416 • Key Terms 416 • Questions and
Exercises 417

10 Liquids and Solids 424
10.1 Intermolecular Forces 426
10.2 The Liquid State 429
10.3 An Introduction to Structures and Types of
Solids 430
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Smart Fluids 434

10.4 Structure and Bonding in Metals

436

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Seething Surfaces 438
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Closest Packing of M & Ms 441

11.7 Colligative Properties of Electrolyte Solutions

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT What Sank the Titanic? 443

10.5 Carbon and Silicon: Network Atomic Solids

444

11.8 Colloids

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Golﬁng with Glass 449

454

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Explosive Sniffer 455

10.7 Ionic Solids 456
10.8 Vapor Pressure and Changes of State
10.9 Phase Diagrams 467

459

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Making Diamonds at Low Pressures:
Fooling Mother Nature 470

For Review 472 • Key Terms 472 • Questions and
Exercises 474

11 Properties of Solutions 484
11.1 Solution Composition

For Review 516 • Key Terms 516 • Questions and
Exercises 518

12 Chemical Kinetics 526
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6
12.7
12.8

Reaction Rates 527
Rate Laws: An Introduction 532
Determining the Form of the Rate Law
The Integrated Rate Law 538
Rate Laws: A Summary 548
Reaction Mechanisms 549
A Model for Chemical Kinetics 552
Catalysis 557

534

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Automobiles: Air Puriﬁers? 560

485

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Enzymes: Nature’s Catalysts 562

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Electronic Ink 488

11.2 The Energies of Solution Formation
11.3 Factors Affecting Solubility 492

For Review 564 • Key Terms 564 • Questions and
Exercises 566

488

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Ionic Liquids? 494
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Lake Nyos Tragedy 497

11.4 The Vapor Pressures of Solutions

514

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Organisms and Ice Formation 516

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Transistors and Printed
Circuits 452

10.6 Molecular Solids

512

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Drink of Champions—
Water 514

497

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Spray Power 500

11.5 Boiling-Point Elevation and Freezing-Point
Depression 504
11.6 Osmotic Pressure 508

13 Chemical Equilibrium 578
13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
13.5

The Equilibrium Condition 579
The Equilibrium Constant 582
Equilibrium Expressions Involving Pressures 586
Heterogeneous Equilibria 588
Applications of the Equilibrium Constant 591

v

15 Applications of Aqueous
Equilibria 680
Acid–Base Equilibria

681

15.1 Solutions of Acids or Bases Containing
a Common Ion 681
15.2 Buffered Solutions 684
15.3 Buffering Capacity 693
15.4 Titrations and pH Curves 696
15.5 Acid–Base Indicators 711

Solubility Equilibria

717

15.6 Solubility Equilibria and the Solubility
Product 771
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Chemistry of Teeth 720

15.7 Precipitation and Qualitative Analysis

Complex Ion Equilibria

724

731

15.8 Equilibria Involving Complex Ions

731

For Review 736 • Key Terms 736 • Questions and
Exercises 739

13.6 Solving Equilibrium Problems
13.7 Le Châtelier’s Principle 604

600

16 Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free
Energy

For Review 610 • Key Terms 610 • Questions and
Exercises 613

16.1 Spontaneous Processes and Entropy
16.2 Entropy and the Second Law of
Thermodynamics 755

14 Acids and Bases 622
14.1 The Nature of Acids and Bases
14.2 Acid Strength 626
14.3 The pH Scale 631

623

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Arnold Beckman, Man of
Science 632

14.4 Calculating the pH of Strong Acid
Solutions 634
14.5 Calculating the pH of Weak Acid
Solutions 635
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Household Chemistry 643

14.6 Bases

644

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Amines 648

14.7 Polyprotic Acids 650
14.8 Acid–Base Properties of Salts 655
14.9 The Effect of Structure on Acid–Base
Properties 661
14.10 Acid–Base Properties of Oxides 662
14.11 The Lewis Acid–Base Model 663
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Self-Destructing Paper 666

14.12 Strategy for Solving Acid–Base Problems:
A Summary 666
For Review 668 • Key Terms 668 • Questions and
Exercises 672

vi

748
749

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Entropy: An Organizing Force? 756

16.3
16.4
16.5
16.6
16.7
16.8
16.9

The Effect of Temperature on Spontaneity 756
Free Energy 759
Entropy Changes in Chemical Reactions 762
Free Energy and Chemical Reactions 766
The Dependence of Free Energy on Pressure 770
Free Energy and Equilibrium 774
Free Energy and Work 778
For Review 780 • Key Terms 780 • Questions and
Exercises 782

17 Electrochemistry 790
17.1 Galvanic Cells 791
17.2 Standard Reduction Potentials 794
17.3 Cell Potential, Electrical Work, and
Free Energy 800
17.4 Dependence of Cell Potential on Concentration
17.5 Batteries 808

803

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Printed Batteries 809
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Thermophotovoltaics: Electricity
from Heat 810
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Fuel Cells for Cars 812

17.6 Corrosion

813

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Paint that Stops Rust—
Completely 814

17.7 Electrolysis

816

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Chemistry of Sunken
Treasure 820

17.8 Commercial Electrolytic Processes

821

For Review 826 • Key Terms 826 • Questions and
Exercises 829

18 The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View 840
18.1 Nuclear Stability and Radioactive Decay 841
18.2 The Kinetics of Radioactive Decay 846
18.3 Nuclear Transformations 849
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Stellar Nucleosynthesis 850

18.4
18.5
18.6
18.7

Detection and Uses of Radioactivity 852
Thermodynamic Stability of the Nucleus 856
Nuclear Fission and Nuclear Fusion 859
Effects of Radiation 863
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Nuclear Physics:
An Introduction 864

For Review 867 • Key Terms 867 • Questions and
Exercises 869

19 The Representative Elements: Groups
1A Through 4A
19.1
19.2
19.3
19.4
19.5

874

A Survey of the Representative Elements
The Group 1A Elements 880
Hydrogen 883
The Group 2A Elements 885
The Group 3A Elements 888

875

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Boost Your Boron 889

19.6 The Group 4A Elements

890

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Concrete Learning 892
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Beethoven: Hair Is the Story 893

For Review 894 • Key Terms 894 • Questions and
Exercises 895

20 The Representative Elements: Groups
5A Through 8A

900

20.1 The Group 5A Elements 901
20.2 The Chemistry of Nitrogen 903
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Nitrous Oxide: Laughing Gas That
Propels Whipped Cream and Cars 912

20.3 The Chemistry of Phosphorus

913

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Phosphorus: An Illuminating
Element 914

20.4
20.5
20.6
20.7

The
The
The
The

Group 6A Elements 918
Chemistry of Oxygen 919
Chemistry of Sulfur 920
Group 7A Elements 924

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Photography 926

20.8 The Group 8A Elements

931

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Automatic Sunglasses 931

For Review 933 • Key Terms 933 • Questions and
Exercises 936

21 Transition Metals and Coordination
Chemistry

942

21.1 The Transition Metals: A Survey 943
21.2 The First-Row Transition Metals 949
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Titanium Dioxide—Miracle
Coating 951
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Titanium Makes Great
Bicycles 952

21.3 Coordination Compounds

955

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Alfred Werner: Coordination
Chemist 960

21.4 Isomerism

960

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Importance of Being cis 963

vii

22.5 Polymers

1016

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Heal Thyself 1018
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Wallace Hume Carothers 1022
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Plastic That Talks and Listens 1024

22.6 Natural Polymers

1025

■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Tanning in the Shade 1032

For Review 1040 • Key Terms 1040 • Questions and
Exercises 1044

Appendix 1
A1.1
A1.2
A1.3
A1.4
A1.5

Appendix 2

21.5 Bonding in Complex Ions: The Localized Electron
Model 965
21.6 The Crystal Field Model 967
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Transition Metal Ions Lend Color
to Gems 970

21.7 The Biologic Importance of Coordination
Complexes 973
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT The Danger of Mercury 975
■ CHEMICAL IMPACT Supercharged Blood 978

21.8 Metallurgy and Iron and Steel Production

978

For Review 987 • Key Terms 987 • Questions and
Exercises 989

Mathematical Procedures

Appendix 3
Appendix 4
Appendix 5

The Quantitative Kinetic Molecular
Model A13
Spectral Analysis A16
Selected Thermodynamic Data A19
Equilibrium Constants and Reduction
Potentials A22

A5.1 Values of Ka for Some Common Monoprotic
Acids A22
A5.2 Stepwise Dissociation Constants for Several Common
Polyprotic Acids A23
A5.3 Values of Kb for Some Common Weak Bases A23
A5.4 Ksp Values at 25C for Common Ionic Solids A24
A5.5 Standard Reduction Potentials at 25C (298K) for
Many Common Half-Reactions A25

22 Organic and Biological Molecules 996

Appendix 6

22.1
22.2
22.3
22.4

Glossary A27
Photo Credits A39
Answers to Selected Exercises
Index A70

viii

Alkanes: Saturated Hydrocarbons
Alkenes and Alkynes 1005
Aromatic Hydrocarbons 1008
Hydrocarbon Derivatives 1010

997

A1

Exponential Notation A1
Logarithms A4
Graphing Functions A6
Solving Quadratic Equations A7
Uncertainties in Measurements A10

SI Units and Conversion Factors

A41

A26

To the Professor

W

ith this edition of Chemistry, students and instructors
alike will experience a truly integrated learning program. The
textbook’s strong emphasis on conceptual learning and problem solving is extended through the numerous online media assignments and activities. It was our mission to create a media
program that embodies the spirit of the textbook so that, when
instructors and students look online for either study aids or online homework, that each resource supports the goals of the
textbook—a strong emphasis on models, real-world applications, and visual learning.
We have gone over every page in the sixth edition thoroughly, ﬁne-tuning in some cases and rewriting in others. In
doing so, we have incorporated numerous constructive suggestions from instructors who used the previous edition. Based on
this feedback new content has been added, such as the treatment of real gases in Chapter 5, which has been expanded to
include a discussion of speciﬁc gases, and also coverage of photoelectric effect has been added to Chapter 7. In addition, the
Sample Exercises in Chapter 2 have been revised to cover the
naming of compounds given the formula and the opposite
process of writing the formula from the name. To help students
review key concepts, the For Review section of each chapter
has been reorganized to provide an easy-to-read bulleted summary; this section includes new review questions. The art program has been enhanced to include electrostatic potential maps
to show a more accurate distribution of charge in molecules.
In the media program instructors will ﬁnd a variety of resources to assign additional practice, study, and quiz material. ChemWork interactive assignments, end-of-chapter online
homework, HM Testing, and classroom response system applications allow you to assess students in multiple ways. The
Online Study Center promotes self-study with animations,
video demonstrations, and practice exercises.

Important Features of Chemistry
●

Chemistry contains numerous discussions, illustrations,
and exercises aimed at overcoming common misconceptions. It has become increasingly clear from our own teaching experience that students often struggle with chemistry
because they misunderstand many of the fundamental concepts. In this text, we have gone to great lengths to provide illustrations and explanations aimed at giving students
more accurate pictures of the fundamental ideas of chemistry. In particular, we have attempted to represent the
microscopic world of chemistry so that students have a picture in their minds of “what the atoms and molecules are

●

●

●

doing.” The art program along with animations emphasize
this goal. Also, we have placed a larger emphasis on the
qualitative understanding of concepts before quantitative
problems are considered. Because using an algorithm to
correctly solve a problem often masks misunderstanding—
students assume they understand the material because they
got the right “answer”—it is important to probe their
understanding in other ways. In this vein the text includes
a number of Active Learning Questions (previously called
In-Class Discussion Questions) at the end of each chapter
that are intended for group discussion. It is our experience
that students often learn the most when they teach each
other. Students are forced to recognize their own lack of
conceptual understanding when they try and fail to explain
a concept to a colleague.
With a strong problem-solving orientation, this text talks to
the student about how to approach and solve chemical problems. We have made a strong pitch to students for using a
thoughtful and logical approach rather than simply memorizing procedures. In particular, an innovative method is
given for dealing with acid–base equilibria, the material the
typical student ﬁnds most difﬁcult and frustrating. The key
to this approach involves ﬁrst deciding what species are present in solution, then thinking about the chemical properties
of these species. This method provides a general framework
for approaching all types of solution equilibria.
The text contains almost 300 sample exercises, with many
more examples given in the discussions leading to sample
exercises or used to illustrate general strategies. When a speciﬁc strategy is presented, it is summarized, and the sample
exercise that follows it reinforces the step-by-step attack on
the problem. In general, in approaching problem solving we
emphasize understanding rather than an algorithm-based
approach.
We have presented a thorough treatment of reactions that
occur in solution, including acid–base reactions. This material appears in Chapter 4, directly after the chapter on chemical stoichiometry, to emphasize the connection between
solution reactions and chemical reactions in general. The
early presentation of this material provides an opportunity
to cover some interesting descriptive chemistry and also supports the lab, which typically involves a great deal of aqueous chemistry. Chapter 4 also includes oxidation–reduction
reactions, because a large number of interesting and important chemical reactions involve redox processes. However,
coverage of oxidation–reduction is optional at this point and
depends on the needs of a speciﬁc course.

ix

x
●

●

●

●

●

To the Professor
Descriptive chemistry and chemical principles are thoroughly integrated in this text. Chemical models may appear
sterile and confusing without the observations that stimulated their invention. On the other hand, facts without organizing principles may seem overwhelming. A combination
of observations and models can make chemistry both interesting and understandable. In addition, in those chapters that
deal with the chemistry of the elements systematically, we
have made a continuous effort to show how properties and
models correlate. Descriptive chemistry is presented in a variety of ways—as applications of the principles in separate
sections, in Sample Exercises and exercise sets, in photographs, and in Chemical Impact features.
Throughout the book a strong emphasis on models prevails.
Coverage includes how they are constructed, how they are
tested, and what we learn when they inevitably fail. Models are developed naturally, with pertinent observations
always presented ﬁrst to show why a particular model was
invented.
Everyday-life applications of chemistry that should be of
interest to students taking general chemistry appear
throughout the text. For example, the Chemical Impact
“Pearly Whites” illustrates the procedures for keeping teeth
white, and “Thin is In” discusses the new technology being
used to produce plasma ﬂat-panel displays. Many industrial
applications have also been incorporated into the text.
A double-helix icon in the Instructor’s Annotated Edition
highlights organic and biological examples of applications
that are integrated throughout the text, in end-of-chapter
problems, in exercises, or in-text discussions or examples.
This feature allows instructors to quickly locate material that
will be of particular interest to students in pre-medicine,
biology, or other health-related ﬁelds.
Judging from the favorable comments of instructors and
students who have used the sixth edition, the text seemed
to work very well in a variety of courses. We were especially pleased that readability was cited as a key strength
when students were asked to assess the text. Thus, although
the text has been ﬁne-tuned in many areas, we have endeavored to build on the basic descriptions, strategies,
analogies, and explanations that were successful in the previous editions.

●

●

●

●

●

●

New to the Seventh Edition
The seventh edition of Chemistry incorporates many signiﬁcant
improvements and is accompanied by new and enhanced media products and support services.
●

Electrostatic potential maps have been added to Chapter 8
to show a more accurate distribution of charge in molecules.
These maps are based on ab initio molecular modeling
calculations and provide a convenient method for better
student understanding of bond and molecular polarity.

Additional topics have been added to the text, which include
a treatment of real gases in Chapter 5 and coverage of
photoelectric effect to Chapter 7. In addition, the Sample
Exercises in Chapter 2 have been revised to cover the naming of compounds given the formula and the opposite
process of writing the formula from the name.
The end-of-chapter exercises and problems have been
revised, providing approximately 20% new problems, including some that feature molecular art. End-of-chapter
problems include: Active Learning Questions to test
students’ conceptual grasp of the material; Questions to help
review important facts; Exercises that are paired and
organized by topic; Additional Exercises, which are not
keyed by topic; Challenge Problems, which require students
to combine skills and problems; and Marathon Problems,
which are the most comprehensive and challenging type
of problem. New to the seventh edition are Integrative
Problems that require students to understand multiple
concepts across chapters.
The For Review section, at the beginning of the end-ofchapter exercises, has been reorganized to help students
more easily identify key concepts and test themselves on
these concepts with review questions.
A large number of new Chemical Impacts have been included in the seventh edition to continue the emphasis on
up-to-date application of chemistry in the real world. These
essays feature intriguing topics such as “Faux Snow,” and
“Closest Packing of M&M’s®.”
To support the use of active learning in chemical education,
we have created new PowerPoint presentations—Active
Learning PowerPoints with Lecture Outlines. These PowerPoint presentations feature in-class discussion questions
called Reacts, chemical demonstrations, animations, and ﬁgures from the text. This material is designed to help instructors present chemistry using an interactive teaching
style, which we believe is most effective in promoting student learning. An Active Learning Guide includes the discussion questions and supporting information in a workbook
format. The questions are repeated in the workbook (with
space to record answers) so that students can focus on participation in class sessions. This guide can then be used effectively for independent student review outside of class.
The Online Study Center has been enhanced to include a
variety of tools to support visual learning and to give students extra practice. A For Review section summarizes the
key topics of each chapter and helps students visualize the
concepts with animations and video demonstrations. Visualization quiz questions allow students to test their knowledge of the concepts presented through the animations and
video demonstrations. ACE practice tests allow students to
practice problems on their own, and get immediate feedback. Additional resources include a molecule library, interactive periodic table, and ﬂashcards to help students study
key terms.

To the Professor
●

A very important feature accompanying the seventh edition
is the online homework in the Eduspace® online learning
tool. In addition to new algorithmic end-of-chapter questions, Eduspace also includes ChemWork™ interactive online homework. ChemWork is structured to help students
learn chemistry in a conceptual way and is a series of textbased assignments. The system is modeled on a one-to-one
teacher- student problem session. When a student cannot answer a given question, instead of giving him/her the correct
answer, a system of interactive hints is available to help them
think through each problem. Often the hints are in the form
of a question on which the student receives feedback. Links
to text material are also available for reference to key concepts at points of learning. The philosophy behind the homework is to help students understand the material so that they
can arrive at the correct answer by their own efforts, supported by the kind of help an instructor would provide in a
one-to-one tutoring session.
Another important feature of this homework system is
that each student, even in a very large course, receives a
unique set of tasks for each homework assignment, which
is accomplished using random number–generation and similar versions of algorithmic problems. Each student’s work
is assessed by the system, and the score for each task in the
assignment is recorded in the electronic gradebook for immediate access by both student and instructor. The system
also encourages increased student responsibility by setting
ﬁrm deadlines for assignments. From the instructor’s perspective, Eduspace encourages student study without the
burden of tracking student efforts through grading. Our experience with a similar system at the University of Illinois
convinces us that this interactive homework represents an
important breakthrough in helping students learn chemistry.

●

●

●

xi

more subtle thermodynamic concepts are left until later
(Chapter 16). These two chapters may be used together if
desired.
To make the book more ﬂexible, the derivation of the ideal
gas law from the kinetic molecular theory and quantitative
analysis using spectroscopy are presented in the appendixes.
Although mainstream general chemistry courses typically do
not cover this material, some courses may ﬁnd it appropriate.
By using the optional material in the appendixes and by assigning the more difﬁcult end-of-chapter exercises (from the
additional exercises section), an instructor will ﬁnd the level
of the text appropriate for many majors courses or for other
courses requiring a more extensive coverage of these topics.
Because some courses cover bonding using only a Lewis
structure approach, orbitals are not presented in the introductory chapter on bonding (Chapter 8). In Chapter 9 both
hybridization and the molecular orbital model are covered,
but either or both of these topics may be omitted if desired.
Chapter 4 can be tailored to ﬁt the speciﬁc course involved.
Used in its entirety where it stands in the book, it provides
interesting examples of descriptive chemistry and supports
the laboratory program. Material in this chapter can also be
skipped entirely or covered at some later point, whenever
appropriate. For example, the sections on oxidation and
reduction can be taught with electrochemistry. Although
many instructors prefer early introduction of this concept,
these sections can be omitted without complication since the
next few chapters do not depend on this material.

Supplements
An extensive teaching and learning package has been designed
to make this book more useful to both instructors and students.

Flexibility of Topic Order

Technology: For Instructors

The order of topics in the text was chosen because it is preferred by the majority of instructors. However, we consciously
constructed the book so that many other orders are possible.
During our tenure at the University of Illinois, for a two-chapter
sequence, we used the chapters in this order: 1–6, 13–15, 7–9,
18, 21, 12, 10, 11, 16, 17, and parts of 22. Sections of Chapters 19, 20, and parts of 22 are used throughout the two semesters as appropriate. This order, chosen because of the way
the laboratory is organized, is not necessarily recommended,
but it illustrates the ﬂexibility of order built into the text.
Some speciﬁc points about topic order:

Chemistry is accompanied by a complete suite of teaching and
learning tools, including the customizable media resources below. Whether online or via CD, these integrated resources are
designed to save you time and help make class preparation, presentation, assessment, and course management more efﬁcient
and effective.

●

●

About half of chemistry courses present kinetics before equilibria; the other half present equilibria ﬁrst. This text is written to accommodate either order.
The introductory aspects of thermodynamics are presented
relatively early (in Chapter 6) because of the importance of
energy in various chemical processes and models, but the

●

Media Integration Guide for Instructors is your portal to
the digital assets for this text. It includes the CDs described
below as well as a user name and password to the Online
Teaching Center, giving you instant access to text-related
materials.
HM ClassPrep™ CD includes everything an instructor needs
to develop lectures: Active Learning PowerPoints with Lecture Outlines; virtually all text ﬁgures, tables, and photos in
PowerPoint slides and as JPEGs; the Instructor’s Resource
Guide in Word; Word ﬁles of the printed Test Bank; and Word
ﬁles of the Complete Solutions Manual.

xii

To the Professor
HM Testing™ (powered by Diploma®) is Houghton Mifﬂin’s
new version of HM Testing. It signiﬁcantly improves on
functionality and ease of use by offering instructors all the
tools they will need to create, author, deliver, and customize
multiple types of tests—including authoring and editing
algorithmic questions. New content includes 150 new Conceptual Questions, skill-level coding, and preprogrammed,
algorithmic questions. HM Testing combines a ﬂexible
test-editing program with a comprehensive gradebook function for easy administration and tracking. It enables instructors to administer tests via print, network server, or the
web. The HM Testing database contains a wealth of questions and can produce multiple-choice, true/false, ﬁll-inthe-blank, and essay tests. Questions can be customized
based on the chapter being covered, the question format,
level of difﬁculty, and speciﬁc topics. Available on the
HM ClassPrep CD.
HM ClassPresent™ 2006: General Chemistry features
new animations and video demonstrations. HM ClassPresent provides a library of high-quality, scaleable lab demonstrations and animations covering core chemistry concepts
arranged by chapter and topic. The resources within it can
be browsed by thumbnail and description or searched by
chapter, title, or keyword. Instructors can export the animations and videos into a variety of presentation formats or use
for presentation directly from the CD. Full transcripts accompany all audio commentary to reinforce visual presentations and to cater to different learning styles.
Online Teaching Center includes classroom presentation
and preparation materials. Animations; videos; virtually all
ﬁgures, tables, and photos from the text are available in
JPEG and PowerPoint format; the Transition Guide from the
sixth to seventh edition; Active Learning PowerPoints with
Lecture Outlines; and classroom response system content
are all available online.
Eduspace (powered by Blackboard™), Houghton Mifﬂin’s
complete course-management solution, features algorithmic, end-of-chapter questions along with ChemWork interactive online homework. Both types of homework problems include links to relevant pages from the text. These
integrated resources allow students to reference core concepts at the point of learning. ChemWork assignments help
students learn the process of thinking like a chemist: as
students work through unique, text-based assignments, a
system of interactive hints is available to help them think
through each problem. Eduspace includes all of Blackboard’s powerful features for teaching and learning, and
comes preloaded with course materials including videos
and animations, and a link to SMARTHINKING™ live
online tutoring. Customized functions allow instructors to
tailor these materials to their speciﬁc needs, select, create
and post homework assignments and tests, communicate

●

●

●

with students in a variety of different ways, track student
progress, and manage their portfolio of course work in the
gradebook. To help instructors best utilize the media that
accompanies the textbook, lesson plans have been created
based on the sections of the book. Each section correlates
the relevant ChemWork assignments, Visualization (animations and videos), and online end-of-chapter questions.
Please note: instructors who want their students to use
Eduspace must request a Getting Started Guide for Students which will be bundled free with new copies of the
text. Instructors who adopt Eduspace will receive a
separate Getting Started Guide for Instructors for the
program with a passkey to set up their course.
Classroom Response System (CRS) compatible content on
the Online Teaching Center, HM ClassPrep CD, and in Eduspace allows professors to perform “on-the-spot” assessments, deliver quick quizzes, gauge students’ understanding
of a particular question or concept, and take their class roster easily. Students get immediate feedback on how well they
know the content and where they need to improve. Two sets
of questions are available in PowerPoint slides: one based
on Test Bank content and the other with unique, conceptual
questions. Both question types are correlated to sections in
the textbook. The conceptual questions are also correlated
to relevant media and art from the book.
TeamUP Integration Services
http://teamup.college.hmco.com
Houghton Mifﬂin aims to provide customers with quality
textbooks, technology, and superior training and implementation services. TeamUP, our integration program, offers
ﬂexible, personalized training and consultative services by
phone, online, or on campus. Experienced faculty advisors
and media specialists will assist you and your department
in using our products most effectively.
Course-Management Software is available through WebCT
and Blackboard. These two distributed learning systems allow instructors to create a virtual classroom without any
knowledge of HTML. Features include: assessment tools, a
gradebook, online ﬁle exchange between instructors and students, online syllabi, and course descriptions. The customized
Chemistry cartridges feature Test Bank questions, lecture
materials, and study aids related to the text.

Print Supplements: For Instructors
●

●

Complete Solutions Guide, by Thomas J. Hummel, Susan
Arena Zumdahl, and Steven S. Zumdahl, presents detailed
solutions for all of the end-of-chapter exercises in the text
for the convenience of faculty and staff involved in instruction and for instructors who wish their students to have solutions for all exercises. Departmental approval is required
for the sale of the Complete Solutions Guide to students.
Instructor’s Resource Guide, by Donald J. DeCoste, includes suggestions for alternative orders of topics, suggested
responses to the Active Learning Questions, ampliﬁcation

To the Professor

●

●

●

●

●

of strategies used in various chapters, lesson plans of media
resources correlated to section, answers to Reacts, and a section on notes for teaching assistants.
Lecture Demonstration Guide, by Fred Jurgens of the University of Wisconsin—Madison, lists the sources for over
750 classroom demonstrations that can be used in general
chemistry courses. Icons in the margins of the Instructor’s
Annotated Edition of the text key the demonstrations to their
corresponding text discussions.
Instructor’s Resource Guide for Experimental Chemistry,
Seventh Edition, by James F. Hall, contains tips including
hints on running experiments, approximate times for each
experiment, and answers to all prelab and postlab questions
posed in the laboratory guide.
Bibliobase (www.bibliobase.com) allows instructors to create a completely customized lab manual by mixing and
matching from 88 general chemistry labs—including all
the labs from Experimental Chemistry—and 56 labs for the
course in general, organic, and biochemistry. At the Online Teaching Center, instructors search through the database of labs, make their selections, organize the sequence
of the manual, and submit their order via the Internet. Customized, printed, and bound lab manuals are delivered to
the bookstore within weeks.
Test Item File, by Steven S. Zumdahl, Susan Arena Zumdahl, and Gretchen Adams (available to adopters), offers a
printed version of more than 2000 exam questions, 10 percent of which are new to this edition, referenced to the
appropriate text section. Questions are in multiple-choice,
open-ended, and true-false formats.
Transparencies, in a full-color set of 255, are available to
adopters of the seventh edition of the text.

online homework. Through Eduspace, students can also access
the Online Study Center and SMARTHINKING live, online
tutoring. Instructors who adopt Eduspace will receive a separate user guide for the program with a passkey to set up their
course. Students using Eduspace will also receive a separate
user guide and passkey.
SMARTHINKING live, online tutoring is also available
free with new books upon instructor request. Students may also
purchase stand-alone access to it. SMARTHINKING provides
personalized, text-speciﬁc tutoring and is available during peak
study hours when students need it most. Limits apply; terms
and hours of SMARTHINKING service are subject to change.

Print Supplements: For Students
●

●

●

Technology: For Students
Chemistry is supported by an array of learning tools designed
to help students succeed in their chemistry course. It includes
the following media resources:
A passkey to the Online Study Center is bound into the
front of the textbook. From the Online Study Center, students
have access to practice, visualization, and self-study aids. Visualization animations and video demonstrations help students see
key concepts, and each Visualization is accompanied by quiz
questions for students’ review. A For Review section helps
students review key topics at a glance and includes video demonstrations and animations for additional reinforcement. Flashcards and ACE practice tests help students study key concepts
and problem-solve. A molecule library, glossary, and interactive
periodic table are also available for support. A Student CD, with
many of these Online Study Center resources, is available upon
request for students who do not have Internet access.
Eduspace (powered by Blackboard), Houghton Mifﬂin’s
complete course-management solution, features algorithmic
end-of-chapter questions along with ChemWork interactive

xiii

●

●

Study Guide, by Paul B. Kelter of the University of Illinois—
Urbana. Written to be a self-study aid for students, this guide
includes alternate strategies for solving problems, supplemental explanations for the most difﬁcult material, and selftests. There are approximately 500 worked examples and
1200 practice problems (with answers), designed to give students mastery and conﬁdence.
Student Solutions Manual, by Thomas J. Hummel, Susan
Arena Zumdahl, and Steven S. Zumdahl, all of the University of Illinois, Urbana, provides detailed solutions for half
of the end-of-chapter exercises (designated by the blue question numbers) using the strategies emphasized in the text.
To ensure the accuracy of the solutions, this supplement and
the Complete Solutions Guide were checked independently
by several instructors.
Active Learning Guide, by Donald J. DeCoste. This printed
workbook can be used in lecture or recitation in conjunction with the instructor PowerPoint slides. It provides a complete set of React questions with space for student answers.
Students can use the workbook as a self-study aid outside
of class.
Solving Equilibrium Problems with Applications to Qualitative Analysis, by Steven S. Zumdahl. Successfully used
by thousands of students, this book offers thorough, stepby-step procedures for solving problems related to equilibria taking place both in the gas phase and in solution.
Containing hundreds of sample exercises, test exercises
with complete solutions, and end-of-chapter exercises
with answers, the text utilizes the same problem-solving
methods found in Chemistry and is an excellent source of
additional drill-type problems. The last chapter presents
an exploratory qualitative analysis experiment with explanations based on the principles of aqueous equilibria.
Experimental Chemistry, Seventh Edition, by James F. Hall
of the University of Massachusetts—Lowell, provides an extensively revised laboratory program compatible with the
text. The 48 experiments present a wide variety of chemistry, and many experiments offer choices of procedures.
Safety is strongly emphasized throughout the program.

xiv

To the Professor

Acknowledgments:

This book represents the efforts of
many talented and dedicated people. We particularly want to
thank Richard Stratton, Executive Editor, for his vision and
oversight of this project. Richard’s knowledge, judgment, and
enthusiasm have contributed immeasurably to the success of
this text. He is not only an outstanding editor but also one of
the nicest people in the business.
We also want to thank Cathy Brooks, Senior Project Editor, who did a miraculous job of coordinating the production
of an incredibly complex project with grace and good humor.
We also especially appreciate the excellent work of Rebecca
Berardy Schwartz, Developmental Editor, who managed the revision process in a very supportive and organized manner.
We are especially grateful to Tom Hummel, who managed
the revision of the end-of-chapter problems and the solutions
manuals. Tom’s extensive experience teaching general chemistry and his high standards of accuracy and clarity have
resulted in great improvements in the quality of the problems
and the solutions in this edition. In addition, we very much appreciate the contributions of Don DeCoste, who has helped us
comprehend more clearly the difﬁculties students have with
conceptual understanding and who contributed the Challenge
Problems.
We also extend our thanks to Jason Overby, who rendered
the electrostatic potential maps and who contributed the
Integrative Problems. Our thanks and love also go to Leslie,
Steve, Whitney, Scott, Tyler, Sunshine, and Tony for their continuing support.
Thanks to the others at Houghton Mifﬂin who supplied
valuable assistance on this revision: Jill Haber, Senior Art/Design
Coordinator; Sharon Donahue, Photo Researcher; Katherine
Greig, Senior Marketing Manager; Naveen Hariprasad, Marketing Assistant; and Susan Miscio, Editorial Assistant.
Special thanks go to the following people who helped
shape this edition by offering suggestions for its improvement:
Dawood Afzal, Truman State (media reviewer); Carol
Anderson, University of Connecticut—Avery Point (media
reviewer); Jeffrey R. Appling, Clemson University (media
reviewer); Dave Blackburn, University of Minnesota;
Robert S. Boikess, Rutgers University; Ken Carter, Truman
State (media reviewer); Bette Davidowitz, University of
Cape Town; Natalie Foster, Lehigh University; Tracy A.

Halmi, Penn State Erie, The Behrend College; Carl A.
Hoeger, UC—San Diego; Ahmad Kabbani, Lebanese
American University; Arthur Mar, University of Alberta;
Jim McCormick, Truman State (media reviewer); Richard
Orwell, Blue Ridge Community College (media reviewer);
Jason S. Overby, College of Charleston; Robert D. Pike,
The College of William and Mary; Daniel Raftery, Purdue
University; Jimmy Rogers, University of Texas—Arlington
(media reviewer); Raymond Scott, Mary Washington
College; Alan Stolzenberg, West Virginia University;
Rashmi Venkateswaran, University of Ottawa. AP
reviewers: Annis Hapkiewicz, Okemos High School; Tina
Ohn-Sabatello, Maine Township HS East. Interactive
Course Guide Reviewers: Lynne C. Cary, Ph.D., Bethel
College; Craig C. Martens, University of California—
Irvine; Jeffrey P. Osborne, Manchester College; Donald W.
Shive, Muhlenberg College; Craig Sockwell, Northwest
Shoals Community College; Richard Pennington, College
of St. Mary. Accuracy reviewers: Linda Bush (textbook
reviewer), Jon Booze (media reviewer)
Reviewers of the sixth edition:
Ramesh D. Arasasingham, University of California—Irvine;
Stanley A. Bajue, Medgar Evans College, CUNY; V.G.
Berner, New Mexico Junior College; Dave Blackburn,
University of Minnesota; Steven R. Boone, Central Missouri
State University; Gary S. Buckley, Cameron University;
Lara L. Chappell, SUNY College at Oswego; David Cramb,
University of Calgary; Philip W. Crawford, Southeast
Missouri State University; Philip Davis, University of
Tennessee; Michael P. Garoutte, Missouri Southern State
College; Daniel Graham, Loyola University; David R.
Hawkes, Lambuth University; Dale Hawley, Kansas State
University; Thomas B. Higgins, Harold Washington College;
John C. Hogan, Louisiana State University; Donald P. Land,
University of California—Davis; Michael P. Masingale,
LeMoyne College; Julie T. Millard, Colby College; Robert H.
Paine, Rochester Institute of Technology; Brenda Ross,
Cottey College; Jay S. Shore, South Dakota State University;
Richard T. Toomey, Northwest Missouri State University;
Robert Zoellner, Humboldt State University.

To the Student

T

he major purpose of this book, of course, is to help you
learn chemistry. However, this main thrust is closely linked to
two other goals: to show how important and how interesting
the subject is, and to show how to think like a chemist. To solve
complicated problems the chemist uses logic, trial and error,
intuition, and, above all, patience. A chemist is used to being
wrong. The important thing is to learn from a mistake, recheck
assumptions, and try again. A chemist thrives on puzzles that
seem to defy solutions.
Many of you using this text do not plan to be practicing
chemists. However, the nonchemist can beneﬁt from the
chemist’s attitude. Problem solving is important in all professions and in all walks of life. The techniques you will learn
from this book will serve you well in any career you choose.
Thus, we believe that the study of chemistry has much to offer
the nonmajor, including an understanding of many fascinating
and important phenomena and a chance to hone problemsolving skills.
This book attempts to present chemistry in a manner that
is sensible to the novice. Chemistry is not the result of an inspired vision. It is the product of countless observations and
many attempts, using logic and trial and error, to account for
these observations. In this book the concepts are developed in
a natural way: The observations come ﬁrst and then models are
constructed to explain the observed behavior.
Models are a major focus in this book. The uses and limitations of models are emphasized, and science is treated as a
human activity, subject to all the normal human foibles. Mistakes are discussed as well as successes.
A central theme of this book is a thoughtful, systematic
approach to problem solving. Learning encompasses much
more than simply memorizing facts. Truly educated people use
their factual knowledge as a starting point—a base for creative
approaches to solving problems.
Read through the material in the text carefully. For most
concepts, illustrations or photos will help you visualize what
is going on. To further help you visualize concepts by using
animations and videos, we have included Visualization exercises on the Online Study Center or on an optional free CD.
Icons in the text margin signal that there is companion material available on the CD.
Often a given type of problem is “walked through” in the
text before the corresponding Sample Exercises appear. Strategies for solving problems are given throughout the text.

Thoroughly examine the Sample Exercises and the problem-solving strategies. The strategies summarize the approach
taken in the text; the Sample Exercises follow the strategies
step-by-step. Schematics in Chapter 15 also illustrate the
logical pathways to solving aqueous equilibrium problems.
Throughout the text, we have used margin notes to highlight key points, to comment on an application of the text
material, or to reference material in other parts of the book.
Chemical Impact, the boxed feature that appears frequently
throughout the text, discusses especially interesting applications of chemistry to the everyday world.
Each chapter has a summary and key terms list for review,
and the glossary gives a quick reference for deﬁnitions.
Learning chemistry requires working the end-of-chapter
exercises assigned by your professor. Answers to exercises
denoted by blue question numbers are in the back of the
book, and complete solutions to those exercises are in the
Partial Solutions Guide. To help you assess your level of
proﬁciency, the Online Study Center (college.hmco.com/PIC/
zumdahl7e) offers quizzes and electronic homework assignments that feature instant feedback.
The Study Guide contains extra practice problems and
many worked examples. The supplement, Solving Equilibrium
Problems with Applications to Qualitative Analysis, reinforces
in great detail the text’s step-by-step approach to solving
equilibrium problems and contains many worked examples and
self-quiz questions.
It is very important to use the exercises and electronic
homework assignments to your best advantage. Your main goal
should not be to simply get the correct answer but to understand the process for getting the answer. Memorizing the solutions for speciﬁc problems is not a very good way to prepare
for an exam. There are too many pigeonholes required to cover
every possible problem type. Look within the problem for the
solution. Use the concepts you have learned along with a systematic, logical approach to ﬁnd the solution. Learn to trust
yourself to think it out. You will make mistakes, but the important thing is to learn from these errors. The only way to gain
conﬁdence is to do lots of practice problems and use these to
diagnose your weaknesses.
Be patient and thoughtful and work hard to understand
rather than simply memorize. We wish you an interesting and
satisfying year.

xv

Features of Chemistry Seventh Edition

8.13

Conceptual Understanding
and Problem Solving

Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

The structures of molecules play a very important role in determining their chemical properties. As we will see later, this is particularly important for biological molecules; a slight
change in the structure of a large biomolecule can completely destroy its usefulness to a
cell or may even change the cell from a normal one to a cancerous one.
Many accurate methods now exist for determining molecular structure, the three350usedChapter
dimensional arrangement of the atoms in a molecule. These methods must be
if Eight
precise information about structure is required. However, it is often useful to be able to
predict the approximate molecular structure of a molecule. In this section we consider a
simple model that allows us to do this. This model, called the valence shell electron-pair
repulsion (VSEPR) model, is useful in predicting the geometries of molecules formed
from nonmetals. The main postulate of this model is that the structure around a given
atom is determined principally by minimizing electron-pair repulsions. The idea here is
that the bonding and nonbonding pairs around a given atom will be positioned as far apart
as possible. To see how this model works, we will ﬁrst consider the molecule BeCl2, which
has the Lewis structure

The authors’ emphasis on
modeling (or chemical theories)
throughout the text addresses the
problem of rote memorization by
helping students better
understand and appreciate the
process of scientiﬁc thinking.

Sample Exercise 5.5
Avogadro’s law also can be written as
V2
V1

n1
n2

Bonding: General Concepts

By stressing the
limitations and uses of
scientiﬁc models, the
authors show students
how chemists think
and work.

Fundamental Properties of Models
䊉

Models are human inventions, always based on an incomplete understanding of how
nature works. A model does not equal reality.

䊉

Models are often wrong. This property derives from the ﬁrst property. Models are based
on speculation and are always oversimpliﬁcations.

䊉

Models tend to become more complicated as they age. As ﬂaws are discovered in our
models, we “patch” them and thus add more detail.

䊉

It is very important to understand the assumptions inherent in a particular model before you use it to interpret observations or to make predictions. Simple models usually involve very restrictive assumptions and can be expected to yield only qualitative
information. Asking for a sophisticated explanation from a simple model is like
expecting to get an accurate mass for a diamond using a bathroom scale.
For a model to be used effectively, we must understand its strengths and weaknesses and ask only appropriate questions. An illustration of this point is the simple
aufbau principle used to account for the electron conﬁgurations of the elements. Although this model correctly predicts the conﬁguration for most atoms, chromium and
copper, for example, do not agree with the predictions. Detailed studies show that the
conﬁgurations of chromium and copper result from complex electron interactions that
are not taken into account in the simple model. However, this does not mean that we
should discard the simple model that is so useful for most atoms. Instead, we must
apply it with caution and not expect it to be correct in every case.

䊉

When a model is wrong, we often learn much more than when it is right. If a model
makes a wrong prediction, it usually means we do not understand some fundamental characteristics of nature. We often learn by making mistakes. (Try to remember
this when you get back your next chemistry test.)

8.8

Covalent Bond Energies and Chemical Reactions

In this section we will consider the energies associated with various types of bonds and
see how the bonding concept is useful in dealing with the energies of chemical reactions.
One important consideration is to establish the sensitivity of a particular type of bond
to its molecular environment. For example, consider the stepwise decomposition of
methane:

Avogadro’s Law
Suppose we have a 12.2-L sample containing 0.50 mol oxygen gas (O2) at a pressure of
1 atm and a temperature of 25C. If all this O2 were converted to ozone (O3) at the same
temperature and pressure, what would be the volume of the ozone?
Solution

The Contents gives students an
Process of the topics
Energyto
Required
(kJ/mol)
overview
come.
CH4(g)
CH3(g)
CH2(g)
CH(g)

S CH3(g)  H(g)
S CH2(g)  H(g)
S CH(g)  H(g)
S C(g)  H(g)

435
453
425
339
Total  1652
1652
Average 
 413
4

The balanced equation for the reaction is

3O2 1g2 ¡ 2O3 1g2

To calculate the moles of O3 produced, we must use the appropriate mole ratio:
0.50 mol O2 

lh

h

C

b di b k

i

h

h

i d

i

i

2 mol O3
 0.33 mol O3
3 mol O2

Avogadro’s law states that V  an, which can be rearranged to give
N2

H2

V
a
n
Since a is a constant, an alternative representation is
V1
V2
a
n1
n2
where V1 is the volume of n1 moles of O2 gas and V2 is the volume of n2 moles of O3 gas.
In this case we have

Ar

n1  0.50 mol
V1  12.2 L

CH4

n2  0.33 mol
V2  ?

Solving for V2 gives
V2  a
FIGURE 5.10
These balloons each hold 1.0 L of gas at
25C and 1 atm. Each balloon contains
0.041 mol of gas, or 2.5  1022 molecules.

xvi

n2
0.33 mol
bV a
b 12.2 L  8.1 L
n1 1
0.50 mol

Reality Check: Note that the volume decreases, as it should, since fewer moles of gas
molecules will be present after O2 is converted to O3.
See Exercises 5.35 and 5.36.

Sample Exercises model a step-by-step approach
to solving problems. Cross-references to similar
end-of-chapter exercises are provided at the end of
each Sample Exercise. Reality Checks appear after
the solutions in selected exercises, helping
students evaluate their answers to ensure that they
are reasonable.

Connections
Each chapter begins with
an engaging introduction
that demonstrates how
chemistry is related to
everyday life.

M

uch of the chemistry that affects each of us occurs among substances dissolved
in water. For example, virtually all the chemistry that makes life possible occurs in an
aqueous environment. Also, various medical tests involve aqueous reactions, depending
heavily on analyses of blood and other body ﬂuids. In addition to the common tests for
sugar, cholesterol, and iron, analyses for speciﬁc chemical markers allow detection of
many diseases before obvious symptoms occur.
Aqueous chemistry is also important in our environment. In recent years, contamination of the groundwater by substances such as chloroform and nitrates has been widely
publicized. Water is essential for life, and the maintenance of an ample supply of clean
water is crucial to all civilization.
To understand the chemistry that occurs in such diverse places as the human body,
the atmosphere, the groundwater, the oceans, the local water treatment plant, your hair as
you shampoo it, and so on, we must understand how substances dissolved in water react
with each other.
However, before we can understand solution reactions, we need to discuss the nature
of solutions in which water is the dissolving medium, or solvent. These solutions are called
aqueous solutions. In this chapter we will study the nature of materials after they are dissolved in water and various types of reactions that occur among these substances. You
will see that the procedures developed in Chapter 3 to deal with chemical reactions work
very well for reactions that take place in aqueous solutions. To understand the types of
reactions that occur in aqueous solutions, we must ﬁrst explore the types of species present.
This requires an understanding of the nature of water.

4.1

Water, the Common Solvent

Water is one of the most important substances on earth. It is essential for sustaining the
reactions that keep us alive, but it also affects our lives in many indirect ways. Water
helps moderate the earth’s temperature; it cools automobile engines, nuclear power
plants, and many industrial processes; it provides a means of transportation on the
earth’s surface and a medium for the growth of a myriad of creatures we use as food;
and much more.
One of the most valuable properties of water is its ability to dissolve many different
substances. For example, salt “disappears” when you sprinkle it into the water used to
cook vegetables, as does sugar when you add it to your iced tea. In each case the “disappearing” substance is obviously still present—you can taste it. What happens when a
solid dissolves? To understand this process, we need to consider the nature of water. Liquid
water consists of a collection of H2O molecules. An individual H2O molecule is “bent”
or V-shaped, with an HOOOH angle of approximately 105 degrees:
H

105˚

H

O
The OOH bonds in the water molecule are covalent bonds formed by electron sharing between the oxygen and hydrogen atoms. However, the electrons of the bond are not
shared equally between these atoms. For reasons we will discuss in later chapters, oxygen has a greater attraction for electrons than does hydrogen. If the electrons were shared
equally between the two atoms, both would be electrically neutral because, on average,
the number of electrons around each would equal the number of protons in that nucleus.

127

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Chemical Impact boxes
describe current applications
cyanide. It also forms hydrazoic acid (HN3), a toxicof
andchemistry. These specialexplosive liquid, when treated with acid.
interest boxes cover such
The air bag represents an application of chemistry that
topics as preserving works of
has already saved thousands of lives.
art, molecules as a means of
communication, and the heat
of chili peppers.

The Chemistry of Air Bags

M

ost experts agree that air bags represent a very important advance in automobile safety. These bags, which
are stored in the auto’s steering wheel or dash, are designed
to inﬂate rapidly (within about 40 ms) in the event of a crash,
cushioning the front-seat occupants against impact. The bags
then deﬂate immediately to allow vision and movement after the crash. Air bags are activated when a severe deceleration (an impact) causes a steel ball to compress a spring
and electrically ignite a detonator cap, which, in turn, causes
sodium azide (NaN3) to decompose explosively, forming
sodium and nitrogen gas:
2NaN3 1s2 ¡ 2Na1s2  3N2 1g2
This system works very well and requires a relatively small
amount of sodium azide (100 g yields 56 L N2(g) at 25C
and 1.0 atm).
When a vehicle containing air bags reaches the end of
its useful life, the sodium azide present in the activators must
be given proper disposal. Sodium azide, besides being explosive, has a toxicity roughly equal to that of sodium

Inﬂated air bags.

xvii

Visualization

Solutions are mixed

Electrostatic potential maps help
students visualize the distribution of
charge
in molecules.
Chapter
Eight Bonding:
General Concepts

346

Cl–

Ag+
K+

NO3–

Ag+

Since the equation for lattice energy contains the product Q1Q2, the lattice energy
for a solid with 2 and 2 ions should
be four times that for a solid with 1
and 1 ions. That is,
122 122

112 112

4

For MgO and NaF, the observed ratio of
lattice energies (see Fig. 8.11) is
3916 kJ
 4.24
923 kJ



more negative than that for combining gaseous Na and F ions to form NaF(s). Thus the
energy released in forming a solid containing Mg2 and O2 ions rather than Mg and
O ions more than compensates for the energies required for the processes that produce
the Mg2 and O2 ions.
If there is so much lattice energy to be gained in going from singly charged to
doubly charged ions in the case of magnesium oxide, why then does solid sodium
ﬂuoride contain Na and F ions rather than Na2 and F2 ions? We can answer this
question by recognizing that both Na and F ions have the neon electron conﬁguration. Removal of an electron from Na requires an extremely large quantity of energy
(4560 kJ/mol) because a 2p electron must be removed. Conversely, the addition of an
electron to F would require use of the relatively high-energy 3s orbital, which is also
an unfavorable process. Thus we can say that for sodium ﬂuoride the extra energy
required to form the doubly charged ions is greater than the gain in lattice energy that
would result.
This discussion of the energies involved in the formation of solid ionic compounds
illustrates that a variety of factors operate to determine the composition and structure of
these compounds. The most important of these factors involve the balancing of the energies required to form highly charged ions and the energy released when highly charged
ions combine to form the solid.

8.6

F

F

F

(b)

–

(c)

FIGURE 8.12
The three possible types of bonds: (a) a
covalent bond formed between identical F
atoms; (b) the polar covalent bond of HF,
with both ionic and covalent components;
and (c) an ionic bond with no electron
sharing.

xviii

The art program
emphasizes molecularlevel interactions that
help students visualize
the “micro-macro”
connection.

Partial Ionic Character of Covalent Bonds

Percent ionic character of a bond  a

+

FIGURE 4.17
Photos and accompanying molecular-level representations illustrating the reaction of KCl(aq) with AgNO3(aq) to form AgCl(s). Note that it is not
possible to have a photo of the mixed solution before the reaction occurs, because it is an imaginary step that we use to help visualize the
reaction. Actually, the reaction occurs immediately when the two solutions are mixed.

Recall that when atoms with different electronegativities react to form molecules, the electrons are not shared equally. The possible result is a polar covalent bond or, in the case
of a large electronegativity difference, a complete transfer of one or more electrons to
form ions. The cases are summarized in Fig. 8.12.
How well can we tell the difference between an ionic bond and a polar covalent bond?
The only honest answer to this question is that there are probably no totally ionic bonds
between discrete pairs of atoms. The evidence for this statement comes from calculations
of the percent ionic character for the bonds of various binary compounds in the gas phase.
These calculations are based on comparisons of the measured dipole moments for molecules of the type X—Y with the calculated dipole moments for the completely ionic case,
XY. The percent ionic character of a bond can be deﬁned as

(a)

H



measured dipole moment of X¬Y
b  100%
calculated dipole moment of XY

Application of this deﬁnition to various compounds (in the gas phase) gives the results
shown in Fig. 8.13, where percent ionic character is plotted versus the difference in the
electronegativity values of X and Y. Note from this plot that ionic character increases with
electronegativity difference, as expected. However, none of the bonds reaches 100% ionic
character, even though compounds with the maximum possible electronegativity differences are considered. Thus, according to this deﬁnition, no individual bonds are completely ionic. This conclusion is in contrast to the usual classiﬁcation of many of these
compounds (as ionic solids). All the compounds shown in Fig. 8.13 with more than 50%
ionic character are normally considered to be ionic solids. Recall, however, the results in
Fig. 8.13 are for the gas phase, where individual XY molecules exist. These results cannot necessarily be assumed to apply to the solid state, where the existence of ions is favored by the multiple ion interactions.
Another complication in identifying ionic compounds is that many substances
contain polyatomic ions. For example, NH4Cl contains NH4 and Cl ions, and Na2SO4
contains Na and SO42 ions. The ammonium and sulfate ions are held together
by covalent bonds. Thus, calling NH4Cl and Na2SO4 ionic compounds is somewhat
ambiguous.

Visualization animations and video
demonstrations help students
further understand and visualize
chemical concepts. Animations and
videos (Visualizations) are found
via the Online Study Center and
Online Teaching Center, and HM
ClassPresent instructor CD.

For Review

Practice

Key Terms

For Review

Section 5.1
barometer
manometer
mm Hg
torr
standard atmosphere
pascal

State of a gas
䊉 The state of a gas can be described completely by specifying its pressure (P), volume
(V), temperature (T) and the amount (moles) of gas present (n)
䊉 Pressure
• Common units

Section 5.2

1 torr  1 mm Hg
1 atm  760 torr

Boyle’s law
ideal gas
Charles’s law
absolute zero
Avogadro’s law

Active Learning
Questions are designed
to promote discussion
among groups of
students in class.

universal gas constant
ideal gas law

䊉
䊉

Section 5.4
molar volume
standard temperature and pressure (STP)

1. Consider the following apparatus: a test tube covered with a nonpermeable elastic membrane inside a container that is closed with
a cork. A syringe goes through the cork.

Dalton’s law of partial pressures
partial pressure
mole fraction
4. As you increase the temperature of a gas in Section
a sealed, 5.6
rigid container, what happens to the density of the gas?
Would
the results
kinetic
molecular
theory (KMT)
be the same if you did the same experimentroot
in a mean
container
with
square
velocity
a piston at constant pressure? (See Figure 5.17.)
joule
5. A diagram in a chemistry book shows a magniﬁed
view
of
a
Section 5.7
ﬂask of air as follows:
diffusion
effusion
Graham’s law of effusion

Section 5.8
real gas
van der Waals equation

Cork

Membrane

a. As you push down on the syringe, how does the membrane
covering the test tube change?
b. You stop pushing the syringe but continue to hold it down.
In a few seconds, what happens to the membrane?
2. Figure 5.2 shows a picture of a barometer. Which of the following
statements is the best explanation of how this barometer works?
a. Air pressure outside the tube causes the mercury to move in the
tube until the air pressure inside and outside the tube is equal.
b. Air pressure inside the tube causes the mercury to move in the
tube until the air pressure inside and outside the tube is equal.
c. Air pressure outside the tube counterbalances the weight of
the mercury in the tube.
d. Capillary action of the mercury causes the mercury to go up
the tube.
e. The vacuum that is formed at the top of the tube holds up the
mercury.
Justify your choice, and for the choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them. Pictures help!
3. The barometer below shows the level of mercury at a given atmospheric pressure. Fill all the other barometers with mercury
for that same atmospheric pressure. Explain your answer.

Hg(l)

6.

7.

8.

9.

atmosphere
air pollution
photochemical smog
acid rain
What do you suppose is between the dots (the dots represent air
molecules)?
a. air
b. dust
c. pollutants
d. oxygen
e. nothing
If you put a drinking straw in water, place your ﬁnger over the
opening, and lift the straw out of the water, some water stays in
the straw. Explain.
A chemistry student relates the following story: I noticed my
tires were a bit low and went to the gas station. As I was ﬁlling
the tires, I thought about the kinetic molecular theory (KMT). I
noticed the tires because the volume was low, and I realized that
I was increasing both the pressure and volume of the tires.
“Hmmm,” I thought, “that goes against what I learned in chemistry, where I was told pressure and volume are inversely proportional.” What is the fault in the logic of the chemistry student
in this situation? Explain why we think pressure and volume to
be inversely related (draw pictures and use the KMT).
Chemicals X and Y (both gases) react to form the gas XY, but it
takes a bit of time for the reaction to occur. Both X and Y are
placed in a container with a piston (free to move), and you note
the volume. As the reaction occurs, what happens to the volume
of the container? (See Fig. 5.18.)
Which statement best explains why a hot-air balloon rises when
the air in the balloon is heated?
a. According to Charles’s law, the temperature of a gas is
directly related to its volume. Thus the volume of the balloon
increases, making the density smaller. This lifts the balloon.
b. Hot air rises inside the balloon, and this lifts the balloon.
c. The temperature of a gas is directly related to its pressure.
The pressure therefore increases, and this lifts the balloon.
d. Some of the gas escapes from the bottom of the balloon, thus
decreasing the mass of gas in the balloon. This decreases the
density of the gas in the balloon, which lifts the balloon.
e. Temperature is related to the root mean square velocity of the
gas molecules. Thus the molecules are moving faster, hitting
the balloon more, and thus lifting the balloon.
Justify your choice, and for the choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them.

Questions give students an
217
opportunity to review key
concepts; Exercises (paired and
organized by topic) reinforce
students’ understanding of each
section; Additional Exercises
require students to identify and
apply the appropriate concepts
themselves; Challenge Problems
take students one step further
and challenge students more
rigorously than Additional
Exercises; Integrative Problems
combine concepts from multiple
chapters; Marathon Problems
also combine concepts from
multiple chapters, and they are
the most challenging problems in
the end-of-chapter material.

䊉

䊉

total

1

2

3

n

䊉
䊉

䊉
䊉

Section 5.10

Syringe

䊉

䊉

Section 5.5

These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the learning
that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical concepts.

Each chapter has a For
Review section to
1 atm  101,325 Pa
reinforce key concepts,
Gas laws
Discovered by observing the properties of gases
and includes review
Boyle’s law: PV  k
Charles’s law: V  bT
Avogadro’s law: V  an
questions. Key Terms are
Ideal gas law: PV  nRT
Dalton’s law of partial pressures: P  P  P  Pprinted
 p , where P in
represents
bold type and
the partial pressure of component n in a mixture of gases
Kinetic molecular theory (KMT)
are
deﬁned
where they
Model that accounts for ideal gas behavior
Postulates of the KMT:
ﬁrst
appear.
They are also
• Volume of gas particles is zero
• No particle interactions
grouped
at
the
end of the
• Particles are in constant motion, colliding with the container walls to produce
pressure
chapter
and
in
the
• The average kinetic energy of the gas particles is directly proportional to the
temperature of the gas in kelvins
Glossary at the back of
Gas properties
The particles in any gas sample have a range of velocities
the
text.
The root mean square (rms) velocity for a gas represents
the average
of the squares
• SI unit: pascal

Section 5.3

Active Learning Questions

215

of the particle velocities
urms 
䊉
䊉

3RT
B M

Diffusion: the mixing of two or more gases
Effusion: the process in which a gas passes through a small hole into an empty chamber

Real gas behavior
䊉 Real gases behave ideally only at high temperatures and low pressures
䊉 Understanding how the ideal gas equation must be modiﬁed to account for real gas
behavior helps us understand how gases behave on a molecular level
䊉 Van der Waals found that to describe real gas behavior we must consider particle
interactions and particle volumes

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain how a barometer and a manometer work to measure the pressure of the
atmosphere or the pressure of a gas in a container.

226

Chapter Five

Gases

25C. The air has a mole fraction of nitrogen of 0.790, the rest
being oxygen.
a. Explain why the balloon would ﬂoat when heated. Make sure
to discuss which factors change and which remain constant,
and why this matters. Be complete.
b. Above what temperature would you heat the balloon so that
it would ﬂoat?
123. You have a helium balloon at 1.00 atm and 25C. You want to
make a hot-air balloon with the same volume and same lift as
the helium balloon. Assume air is 79.0% nitrogen, 21.0% oxygen
by volume. The “lift” of a balloon is given by the difference between the mass of air displaced by the balloon and the mass of
gas inside the balloon.
a. Will the temperature in the hot-air balloon have to be higher
or lower than 25C? Explain.
b. Calculate the temperature of the air required for the hot-air
balloon to provide the same lift as the helium balloon at 1.00
atm and 25C. Assume atmospheric conditions are 1.00 atm
and 25C.
124. We state that the ideal gas law tends to hold best at low pressures and high temperatures. Show how the van der Waals equation simpliﬁes to the ideal gas law under these conditions.
125. Atmospheric scientists often use mixing ratios to express the concentrations of trace compounds in air. Mixing ratios are often
expressed as ppmv (parts per million volume):
ppmv of X 

If 2.55  102 mL of NO(g) is isolated at 29C and 1.5 atm, what
amount (moles) of UO2 was used in the reaction?
128. Silane, SiH4, is the silicon analogue of methane, CH4. It is
prepared industrially according to the following equations:
Si1s2  3HCl1g2 ¡ HSiCl3 1l2  H2 1g2
4HSiCl3 1l2 ¡ SiH4 1g2  3SiCl4 1l2
a. If 156 mL of HSiCl3 (d  1.34 g/mL) is isolated when 15.0 L
of HCl at 10.0 atm and 35C is used, what is the percent yield
of HSiCl3?
b. When 156 mL of HSiCl3 is heated, what volume of SiH4 at
10.0 atm and 35C will be obtained if the percent yield of the
reaction is 93.1%?
129. Solid thorium(IV) ﬂuoride has a boiling point of 1680C. What
is the density of a sample of gaseous thorium(IV) ﬂuoride at its
boiling point under a pressure of 2.5 atm in a 1.7-L container?
Which gas will effuse faster at 1680C, thorium(IV) ﬂuoride or
uranium(III) ﬂuoride? How much faster?
130. Natural gas is a mixture of hydrocarbons, primarily methane
(CH4) and ethane (C2H6). A typical mixture might have
methane  0.915 and ethane  0.085. What are the partial pressures of the two gases in a 15.00-L container of natural gas at
20.C and 1.44 atm? Assuming complete combustion of both
gases in the natural gas sample, what is the total mass of water
formed?

vol. of X at STP
 106
total vol. of air at STP

On a recent autumn day, the concentration of carbon monoxide
in the air in downtown Denver, Colorado, reached 3.0  102
ppmv. The atmospheric pressure at that time was 628 torr, and
the temperature was 0C.
a. What was the partial pressure of CO?
b. What was the concentration of CO in molecules per cubic
centimeter?
126. Nitrogen gas (N2) reacts with hydrogen gas (H2) to form ammonia gas (NH3). You have nitrogen and hydrogen gases in a
15.0-L container ﬁtted with a movable piston (the piston allows
the container volume to change so as to keep the pressure constant inside the container). Initially the partial pressure of each
reactant gas is 1.00 atm. Assume the temperature is constant and
that the reaction goes to completion.
a. Calculate the partial pressure of ammonia in the container after the reaction has reached completion.
b. Calculate the volume of the container after the reaction has
reached completion.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

127. In the presence of nitric acid, UO2 undergoes a redox process.
It is converted to UO22 and nitric oxide (NO) gas is produced
according to the following unbalanced equation:
NO3 1aq2  UO2 1aq2 ¡ NO1g2  UO22 1aq2

Marathon Problem*
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

131. Use the following information to identify element A and compound B, then answer questions a and b.
An empty glass container has a mass of 658.572 g. It has a
mass of 659.452 g after it has been ﬁlled with nitrogen gas at a
pressure of 790. torr and a temperature of 15C. When the container is evacuated and reﬁlled with a certain element (A) at a
pressure of 745 torr and a temperature of 26C, it has a mass of
660.59 g.
Compound B, a gaseous organic compound that consists of
85.6% carbon and 14.4% hydrogen by mass, is placed in a stainless steel vessel (10.68 L) with excess oxygen gas. The vessel is
placed in a constant-temperature bath at 22C. The pressure in
the vessel is 11.98 atm. In the bottom of the vessel is a container
that is packed with Ascarite and a desiccant. Ascarite is asbestos
impregnated with sodium hydroxide; it quantitatively absorbs
carbon dioxide:
2NaOH1s2  CO2 1g2 ¡ Na2CO3 1s2  H2O1l2

*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 68,
No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of Chemical
Education, Inc.

xix

Online Problem Solving and Practice

Developed by the Zumdahls to
reinforce the approach of the book,
ChemWork interactive online
homework offers problems
accompanied by hints to help
students as they think through
each problem. ChemWork
assignments are offered in
Eduspace—Houghton Mifﬂin’s
course-management system.

Algorithmic, end-ofchapter exercises from
the text also appear in
Eduspace. Exercises
also include helpful
links to art, tables, and
equations from the
textbook.

The Online Study Center features
Visualization practice exercises.
Visualizations include animations
and video demonstrations that
help students to further
understand chemical concepts.
Each Visualization is accompanied
by quiz questions.

xx

Media Resources for Instructors
HM ClassPrep with HM Testing (powered by Diploma) CD is a
cross-platform CD that contains extensive text-speciﬁc resources
for instructors to incorporate into their lecture presentations.
These customizable assets include PowerPoint slides, Word ﬁles
of the printed Test Bank and Solutions Manual, ﬁgures from the
text, the Instructor’s Resource Guide and more. HM Testing
(powered by Diploma) is Houghton Mifﬂin’s new ﬂexible testediting program, which features algorithmically generated questions, conceptual questions, and factual questions coded by level
of difﬁculty to allow
you to more easily
choose appropriate test
items. Select from 2400
test items designed to
measure the concepts
and principles covered
in the seventh edition.
HM ClassPresent
includes animations
and video demonstrations that can be
used to illustrate
concepts and ideas that
will help students
further understand and visualize chemical concepts. Animations
and videos can be projected directly from the CD, exported
to your computer, and also come embedded in PowerPoint
ﬁles.
Online Teaching Center for Chemistry offers access to
lecture preparation materials; PowerPoint presentation
resources; JPEGs of virtually all text illustrations, tables, and
photos; video demonstrations and animations; molecule
library with CHIME; as well as service and support. Also
included on the Online Teaching Center, you will ﬁnd
classroom response-system slides. These slides allow you
to get on-the-spot feedback on how well your students are
grasping key concepts.
Eduspace, featuring online homework, is Houghton
Mifﬂin’s course-management system. Eduspace allows for
online delivery of course materials, chat and discussion
tools, and includes two types of algorithmic online
homework: ChemWork and end-of-chapter exercises.
ChemWork helps students learn the process of problem
solving with interactive hints that help students think
through each problem.

xxi

Technological Resources for Students

The Online Study Center supports the goals
of the seventh edition with visualization,
practice, and study aids. The Visualizations use
animations and video demonstrations to help
students see the chemistry concepts, and each
Visualization is accompanied by a set of quiz
questions so that students can test their
knowledge of the concept.
The Online Study Center also includes an
interactive review for each chapter, ﬂashcards
of key terms, and ACE practice tests, which
help students prepare for quizzes and exams.
Many of the resources on the Online Study
Center are also available on the optional free,
student CD-ROM.

Students get access to live, online
help through SMARTHINKING™.
E-structors are available when students
need it the most and help students
problem-solve rather than supply
answers. Available free with new books
on instructor’s request. Also available
via Eduspace.

xxii

This page intentionally left blank

1 Chemical Foundations
Contents
1.1 Chemistry: An Overview
• Science: A Process for
Understanding Nature and
Its Changes
1.2 The Scientiﬁc Method
• Scientiﬁc Models
1.3 Units of Measurement
1.4 Uncertainty in Measurement
• Precision and Accuracy
1.5 Signiﬁcant Figures and
Calculations
1.6 Dimensional Analysis
1.7 Temperature
1.8 Density
1.9 Classiﬁcation of Matter

Male Monarch butterﬂies use the pheromones produced by a gland on their wings to make
themselves attractive to females.

b

W

hen you start your car, do you think about chemistry? Probably not, but you
should. The power to start your car is furnished by a lead storage battery. How does this
battery work, and what does it contain? When a battery goes dead, what does that mean?
If you use a friend’s car to “jump start” your car, did you know that your battery could
explode? How can you avoid such an unpleasant possibility? What is in the gasoline that
you put in your tank, and how does it furnish the energy to drive to school? What is the
vapor that comes out of the exhaust pipe, and why does it cause air pollution? Your car’s
air conditioner might have a substance in it that is leading to the destruction of the ozone
layer in the upper atmosphere. What are we doing about that? And why is the ozone layer
important anyway?
All these questions can be answered by understanding some chemistry. In fact, we’ll
consider the answers to all these questions in this text.
Chemistry is around you all the time. You are able to read and understand this sentence because chemical reactions are occurring in your brain. The food you ate for breakfast or lunch is now furnishing energy through chemical reactions. Trees and grass grow
because of chemical changes.
Chemistry also crops up in some unexpected places. When archaeologist Luis Alvarez
was studying in college, he probably didn’t realize that the chemical elements iridium and
niobium would make him very famous when they helped him solve the problem of the
disappearing dinosaurs. For decades scientists had wrestled with the mystery of why the
dinosaurs, after ruling the earth for millions of years, suddenly became extinct 65 million
years ago. In studying core samples of rocks dating back to that period, Alvarez and his
coworkers recognized unusual levels of iridium and niobium in these samples—levels
much more characteristic of extraterrestrial bodies than of the earth. Based on these
observations, Alvarez hypothesized that a large meteor hit the earth 65 million years ago,
changing atmospheric conditions so much that the dinosaurs’ food couldn’t grow, and they
died—almost instantly in the geologic timeframe.
Chemistry is also important to historians. Did you realize that lead poisoning probably was a signiﬁcant contributing factor to the decline of the Roman Empire? The Romans
had high exposure to lead from lead-glazed pottery, lead water pipes, and a sweetening
syrup called sapa that was prepared by boiling down grape juice in lead-lined vessels. It
turns out that one reason for sapa’s sweetness was lead acetate (“sugar of lead”) that
formed as the juice was cooked down. Lead poisoning with its symptoms of lethargy and
mental malfunctions certainly could have contributed to the demise of the Roman society.
Chemistry is also apparently very important in determining a person’s behavior.
Various studies have shown that many personality disorders can be linked directly to
imbalances of trace elements in the body. For example, studies on the inmates at Stateville Prison in Illinois have linked low cobalt levels with violent behavior. Lithium salts
have been shown to be very effective in controlling the effects of manic depressive disease, and you’ve probably at some time in your life felt a special “chemistry” for another
person. Studies suggest there is literally chemistry going on between two people who are
attracted to each other. “Falling in love” apparently causes changes in the chemistry of
the brain; chemicals are produced that give that “high” associated with a new relationship. Unfortunately, these chemical effects seem to wear off over time, even if the relationship persists and grows.
The importance of chemistry in the interactions of people should not really surprise
us, since we know that insects communicate by emitting and receiving chemical signals via
molecules called pheromones. For example, ants have a very complicated set of chemical

1

2

Chapter One Chemical Foundations
signals to signify food sources, danger, and so forth. Also, various female sex attractants
have been isolated and used to lure males into traps to control insect populations. It would
not be surprising if humans also emitted chemical signals that we were not aware of on
a conscious level. Thus chemistry is pretty interesting and pretty important. The main goal
of this text is to help you understand the concepts of chemistry so that you can better appreciate the world around you and can be more effective in whatever career you choose.

1.1

Chemistry: An Overview

Since the time of the ancient Greeks, people have wondered about the answer to the question: What is matter made of? For a long time humans have believed that matter is composed of atoms, and in the previous three centuries we have collected much indirect
evidence to support this belief. Very recently, something exciting has happened—for the
ﬁrst time we can “see” individual atoms. Of course, we cannot see atoms with the naked
eye but must use a special microscope called a scanning tunneling microscope (STM).
Although we will not consider the details of its operation here, the STM uses an electron
current from a tiny needle to probe the surface of a substance. The STM pictures of several
substances are shown in Fig. 1.1. Notice how the atoms are connected to one another by
“bridges,” which, as we will see, represent the electrons that interconnect atoms.
In addition to “seeing” the atoms in solids such as salt, we have learned how to isolate and view a single atom. For example, the tiny white dot in the center of Fig. 1.2 is a
single mercury atom that is held in a special trap.
So, at this point, we are fairly sure that matter consists of individual atoms. The nature of these atoms is quite complex, and the components of atoms don’t behave much
like the objects we see in the world of our experience. We call this world the macroscopic
world—the world of cars, tables, baseballs, rocks, oceans, and so forth. One of the main
jobs of a scientist is to delve into the macroscopic world and discover its “parts.” For
example, when you view a beach from a distance, it looks like a continuous solid substance.
As you get closer, you see that the beach is really made up of individual grains of sand.

(a)

FIGURE 1.1
(a) The surface of a single grain of table
salt. (b) An oxygen atom (indicated by
arrow) on a gallium arsenide surface.
(c) Scanning tunneling microscope image
showing rows of ring-shaped clusters of
benzene molecules on a rhodium surface.
Each “doughnut”-shaped image represents
a benzene molecule.

(c)

(b)

1.1 Chemistry: An Overview

3

As we examine these grains of sand, we ﬁnd they are composed of silicon and oxygen
atoms connected to each other to form intricate shapes (see Fig. 1.3). One of the main
challenges of chemistry is to understand the connection between the macroscopic world
that we experience and the microscopic world of atoms and molecules. To truly understand chemistry you must learn to think on the atomic level. We will spend much time in
this text helping you learn to do that.
One of the amazing things about our universe is that the tremendous variety of substances we ﬁnd there results from only about 100 different kinds of atoms. You can think
of these approximately 100 atoms as the letters in an alphabet out of which all the “words”
in the universe are made. It is the way the atoms are organized in a given substance that
determines the properties of that substance. For example, water, one of the most common
and important substances on earth, is composed of two types of atoms: hydrogen and
oxygen. There are two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom bound together to form the
water molecule:
oxygen atom

water molecule

hydrogen atom

FIGURE 1.2
A charged mercury atom shows up as a
tiny white dot (indicated by the arrow).

When an electric current passes through it, water is decomposed to hydrogen and oxygen.
These chemical elements themselves exist naturally as diatomic (two-atom) molecules:
oxygen molecule

written O2

hydrogen molecule

written H2

We can represent the decomposition of water to its component elements, hydrogen and
oxygen, as follows:

two water
molecules
written 2H2O

one oxygen molecule
written O2
electric
current

two hydrogen molecules
written 2H2

Notice that it takes two molecules of water to furnish the right number of oxygen and hydrogen atoms to allow for the formation of the two-atom molecules. This reaction explains

O
Si

FIGURE 1.3
Sand on a beach looks uniform from a
distance, but up close the irregular sand
grains are visible, and each grain is composed of tiny atoms.

4

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Chemistry of Art

T

he importance of chemistry can show up in some unusual
places. For example, a knowledge of chemistry is crucial
to authenticating, preserving, and restoring art objects. The
J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles has a state-of-the-art
chemical laboratory that costs many millions of dollars and
employs many scientists. The National Gallery of Art (NGA)
in Washington, D.C., also operates a highly sophisticated
laboratory that employs 10 people: ﬁve chemists, a botanist,
an art historian, a technician with a chemistry degree, and
two fellows (interns).
One of the chemists at NGA is Barbara Berrie, who specializes in identifying paint pigments. One of her duties is to
analyze a painting to see whether the paint pigments are appropriate for the time the picture was supposedly painted and
consistent with the pigments known to be used by the artist
given credit for the painting. This analysis is one way in which
paintings can be authenticated. One of Berrie’s recent projects
was to analyze the 1617 oil painting St. Cecilia and an Angel.
Her results showed the painting was the work of two artists
of the time, Orazio Gentileschi and Giovanni Lanfranco.
Originally the work was thought to be by Gentileschi alone.
Berrie is also working to deﬁne the range of colors used
by water colorist Winslow Homer (the NGA has 30 Homer
paintings in its collection) and to show how his color palette
changed over his career. In addition, she is exploring how
acidity affects the decomposition of a particular deep green
transparent pigment (called copper resinate) used by Italian
Renaissance artists so that paintings using this pigment can
be better preserved.
Berrie says, “The chemistry I do is not hot-dog chemistry, just good old-fashioned general chemistry.”

Dr. Barbara Berrie of the National Gallery of Art is shown
analyzing the glue used in the wooden supports for a
14th century altar piece.

why the battery in your car can explode if you jump start it improperly. When you hook up
the jumper cables, current ﬂows through the dead battery, which contains water (and other
things), and causes hydrogen and oxygen to form by decomposition of some of the water.
A spark can cause this accumulated hydrogen and oxygen to explode, forming water again.
O2
spark

2H2O

2H2

This example illustrates two of the fundamental concepts of chemistry: (1) matter is composed of various types of atoms, and (2) one substance changes to another by reorganizing the way the atoms are attached to each other.
These are core ideas of chemistry, and we will have much more to say about them.

1.2 The Scientiﬁc Method

5

Science: A Process for Understanding Nature and Its Changes
How do you tackle the problems that confront you in real life? Think about your trip to
school. If you live in a city, trafﬁc is undoubtedly a problem you confront daily. How do
you decide the best way to drive to school? If you are new in town, you ﬁrst get a map
and look at the possible ways to make the trip. Then you might collect information from
people who know the area about the advantages and disadvantages of various routes. Based
on this information, you probably try to predict the best route. However, you can ﬁnd
the best route only by trying several of them and comparing the results. After a few
experiments with the various possibilities, you probably will be able to select the best
way. What you are doing in solving this everyday problem is applying the same process
that scientists use to study nature. The ﬁrst thing you did was collect relevant data. Then
you made a prediction, and then you tested it by trying it out. This process contains the
fundamental elements of science.
1. Making observations (collecting data)
2. Making a prediction (formulating a hypothesis)
3. Doing experiments to test the prediction (testing the hypothesis)

Observation
Hypothesis
Experiment

Theory (model)

Theory
modified
as needed

Prediction

Experiment

FIGURE 1.4
The fundamental steps of the scientiﬁc
method.

Scientists call this process the scientiﬁc method. We will discuss it in more detail in
the next section. One of life’s most important activities is solving problems—not “plug
and chug” exercises, but real problems—problems that have new facets to them, that
involve things you may have never confronted before. The more creative you are at
solving these problems, the more effective you will be in your career and your personal life. Part of the reason for learning chemistry, therefore, is to become a better
problem solver. Chemists are usually excellent problem solvers, because to master
chemistry, you have to master the scientiﬁc approach. Chemical problems are frequently
very complicated—there is usually no neat and tidy solution. Often it is difﬁcult to
know where to begin.

1.2

The Scientiﬁc Method

Science is a framework for gaining and organizing knowledge. Science is not simply a
set of facts but also a plan of action—a procedure for processing and understanding certain types of information. Scientiﬁc thinking is useful in all aspects of life, but in this text
we will use it to understand how the chemical world operates. As we have said in our previous discussion, the process that lies at the center of scientiﬁc inquiry is called the
scientiﬁc method. There are actually many scientiﬁc methods, depending on the nature
of the speciﬁc problem under study and on the particular investigator involved. However,
it is useful to consider the following general framework for a generic scientiﬁc method
(see Fig. 1.4):

Steps in the Scientiﬁc Method

➥1

➥2
➥3

Making observations. Observations may be qualitative (the sky is blue; water
is a liquid) or quantitative (water boils at 100C; a certain chemistry book
weighs 2 kilograms). A qualitative observation does not involve a number.
A quantitative observation (called a measurement) involves both a number
and a unit.
Formulating hypotheses. A hypothesis is a possible explanation for an observation.
Performing experiments. An experiment is carried out to test a hypothesis. This
involves gathering new information that enables a scientist to decide whether

6

Chapter One Chemical Foundations
the hypothesis is valid—that is, whether it is supported by the new information
learned from the experiment. Experiments always produce new observations,
and this brings the process back to the beginning again.
To understand a given phenomenon, these steps are repeated many times, gradually accumulating the knowledge necessary to provide a possible explanation of the phenomenon.

Scientiﬁc Models

Observation
Hypothesis
Prediction

Theory
(model)

Theory
modified
as needed

Law

Prediction

Experiment

FIGURE 1.5
The various parts of the scientiﬁc method.

Once a set of hypotheses that agrees with the various observations is obtained, the hypotheses are assembled into a theory. A theory, which is often called a model, is a set of
tested hypotheses that gives an overall explanation of some natural phenomenon.
It is very important to distinguish between observations and theories. An observation
is something that is witnessed and can be recorded. A theory is an interpretation—a
possible explanation of why nature behaves in a particular way. Theories inevitably change
as more information becomes available. For example, the motions of the sun and stars
have remained virtually the same over the thousands of years during which humans have
been observing them, but our explanations—our theories—for these motions have changed
greatly since ancient times. (See the Chemical Impact on Observations, Theories, and the
Planets on the Web site.)
The point is that scientists do not stop asking questions just because a given theory seems to account satisfactorily for some aspect of natural behavior. They continue
doing experiments to reﬁne or replace the existing theories. This is generally done by
using the currently accepted theory to make a prediction and then performing an
experiment (making a new observation) to see whether the results bear out this
prediction.
Always remember that theories (models) are human inventions. They represent attempts to explain observed natural behavior in terms of human experiences. A theory is
actually an educated guess. We must continue to do experiments and to reﬁne our theories (making them consistent with new knowledge) if we hope to approach a more nearly
complete understanding of nature.
As scientists observe nature, they often see that the same observation applies to many
different systems. For example, studies of innumerable chemical changes have shown that
the total observed mass of the materials involved is the same before and after the change.
Such generally observed behavior is formulated into a statement called a natural law. For
example, the observation that the total mass of materials is not affected by a chemical
change in those materials is called the law of conservation of mass.
Note the difference between a natural law and a theory. A natural law is a summary
of observed (measurable) behavior, whereas a theory is an explanation of behavior. A law
summarizes what happens; a theory (model) is an attempt to explain why it happens.
In this section we have described the scientiﬁc method as it might ideally be applied
(see Fig. 1.5). However, it is important to remember that science does not always progress
smoothly and efﬁciently. For one thing, hypotheses and observations are not totally independent of each other, as we have assumed in the description of the idealized scientiﬁc

Robert Boyle (1627–1691) was born in Ireland. He became especially interested in experiments involving
air and developed an air pump with which he produced evacuated cylinders. He used these cylinders to
show that a feather and a lump of lead fall at the same rate in the absence of air resistance and that
sound cannot be produced in a vacuum. His most famous experiments involved careful measurements of
the volume of a gas as a function of pressure. In his book The Skeptical Chymist, Boyle urged that the
ancient view of elements as mystical substances should be abandoned and that an element should instead be deﬁned as anything that cannot be broken down into simpler substances. This conception was
an important step in the development of modern chemistry.

1.2 The Scientiﬁc Method

7

CHEMICAL IMPACT
A Note-able Achievement
ost-it Notes, a product of the 3M Corporation, revolutionized casual written communications and personal
reminders. Introduced in the United States in 1980, these
sticky-but-not-too-sticky notes have now found countless
uses in ofﬁces, cars, and homes throughout the world.
The invention of sticky notes occurred over a period of
about 10 years and involved a great deal of serendipity. The
adhesive for Post-it Notes was discovered by Dr. Spencer F.
Silver of 3M in 1968. Silver found that when an acrylate
polymer material was made in a particular way, it formed
cross-linked microspheres. When suspended in a solvent and
sprayed on a sheet of paper, this substance formed a “sparse
monolayer” of adhesive after the solvent evaporated. Scanning electron microscope images of the adhesive show that
it has an irregular surface, a little like the surface of a gravel
road. In contrast, the adhesive on cellophane tape looks
smooth and uniform, like a superhighway. The bumpy surface of Silver’s adhesive caused it to be sticky but not so
sticky to produce permanent adhesion, because the number
of contact points between the binding surfaces was limited.
When he invented this adhesive, Silver had no speciﬁc
ideas for its use, so he spread the word of his discovery to
his fellow employees at 3M to see if anyone had an application for it. In addition, over the next several years development was carried out to improve the adhesive’s properties. It was not until 1974 that the idea for Post-it Notes
popped up. One Sunday Art Fry, a chemical engineer for

P

3M, was singing in his church choir when he became annoyed that the bookmark in his hymnal kept falling out. He
thought to himself that it would be nice if the bookmark
were sticky enough to stay in place but not so sticky that it
couldn’t be moved. Luckily, he remembered Silver’s glue—
and the Post-it Note was born.
For the next three years Fry worked to overcome the
manufacturing obstacles associated with the product. By
1977 enough Post-it Notes were being produced to supply
3M’s corporate headquarters, where the employees quickly
became addicted to their many uses. Post-it Notes are now
available in 62 colors and 25 shapes.
In the years since their introduction, 3M has heard some
remarkable stories connected to the use of these notes. For
example, a Post-it Note was applied to the nose of a corporate jet, where it was intended to be read by the plane’s Las
Vegas ground crew. Someone forgot to remove it, however.
The note was still on the nose of the plane when it landed
in Minneapolis, having survived a take-off and landing and
speeds of 500 miles per hour at temperatures as low as
56F. Stories on the 3M Web site also describe how a Postit Note on the front door of a home survived the 140 mile
per hour winds of Hurricane Hugo and how a foreign ofﬁcial
accepted Post-it Notes in lieu of cash when a small bribe
was needed to cut through bureaucratic hassles.
Post-it Notes have deﬁnitely changed the way we communicate and remember things.

method. The coupling of observations and hypotheses occurs because once we begin to
proceed down a given theoretical path, our hypotheses are unavoidably couched in the
language of that theory. In other words, we tend to see what we expect to see and often
fail to notice things that we do not expect. Thus the theory we are testing helps us because it focuses our questions. However, at the very same time, this focusing process may
limit our ability to see other possible explanations.
It is also important to keep in mind that scientists are human. They have prejudices;
they misinterpret data; they become emotionally attached to their theories and thus lose
objectivity; and they play politics. Science is affected by proﬁt motives, budgets, fads,
wars, and religious beliefs. Galileo, for example, was forced to recant his astronomical
observations in the face of strong religious resistance. Lavoisier, the father of modern
chemistry, was beheaded because of his political afﬁliations. Great progress in the chemistry of nitrogen fertilizers resulted from the desire to produce explosives to ﬁght wars.
The progress of science is often affected more by the frailties of humans and their
institutions than by the limitations of scientiﬁc measuring devices. The scientiﬁc methods are only as effective as the humans using them. They do not automatically lead
to progress.

8

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Critical Units!
ow important are conversions from one unit to another?
If you ask the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), very important! In 1999 NASA lost a $125
million Mars Climate Orbiter because of a failure to convert
from English to metric units.
The problem arose because two teams working on the
Mars mission were using different sets of units. NASA’s scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, assumed that the thrust data for the rockets on the
Orbiter they received from Lockheed Martin Astronautics in
Denver, which built the spacecraft, were in metric units. In
reality, the units were English. As a result the Orbiter dipped
100 kilometers lower into the Mars atmosphere than planned
and the friction from the atmosphere caused the craft to
burn up.
NASA’s mistake refueled the controversy over whether
Congress should require the United States to switch to the
metric system. About 95% of the world now uses the metric system, and the United States is slowly switching from
English to metric. For example, the automobile industry has
adopted metric fasteners and we buy our soda in two-liter
bottles.

H

1.3

Soda is commonly sold in 2-liter bottles—
an example of the use of SI units in everyday life.

Units can be very important. In fact, they can mean the
difference between life and death on some occasions. In 1983,
for example, a Canadian jetliner almost ran out of fuel when
someone pumped 22,300 pounds of fuel into the aircraft instead of 22,300 kilograms. Remember to watch your units!

Artist’s conception of the lost Mars Climate Orbiter.

Units of Measurement

Making observations is fundamental to all science. A quantitative observation, or measurement, always consists of two parts: a number and a scale (called a unit). Both parts
must be present for the measurement to be meaningful.
In this textbook we will use measurements of mass, length, time, temperature, electric current, and the amount of a substance, among others. Scientists recognized long ago
that standard systems of units had to be adopted if measurements were to be useful. If
every scientist had a different set of units, complete chaos would result. Unfortunately,
different standards were adopted in different parts of the world. The two major systems
are the English system used in the United States and the metric system used by most of
the rest of the industrialized world. This duality causes a good deal of trouble; for example, parts as simple as bolts are not interchangeable between machines built using the two
systems. As a result, the United States has begun to adopt the metric system.
Most scientists in all countries have for many years used the metric system. In 1960,
an international agreement set up a system of units called the International System (le
Système International in French), or the SI system. This system is based on the metric
system and units derived from the metric system. The fundamental SI units are listed in
Table 1.1. We will discuss how to manipulate these units later in this chapter.
Because the fundamental units are not always convenient (expressing the mass of a
pin in kilograms is awkward), preﬁxes are used to change the size of the unit. These are
listed in Table 1.2. Some common objects and their measurements in SI units are listed
in Table 1.3.

1.3 Units of Measurement

1 m3

9

TABLE 1.1 The Fundamental SI Units
Physical Quantity
Mass
Length
Time
Temperature
Electric current
Amount of substance
Luminous intensity

1 dm3 = 1 L

1 cm3 = 1 mL

Name of Unit

Abbreviation

kilogram
meter
second
kelvin
ampere
mole
candela

kg
m
s
K
A
mol
cd

One physical quantity that is very important in chemistry is volume, which is not a fundamental SI unit but is derived from length. A cube that measures 1 meter (m) on each edge
is represented in Fig. 1.6. This cube has a volume of (1 m)3  1 m3. Recognizing that there
are 10 decimeters (dm) in a meter, the volume of this cube is (1 m)3  (10 dm)3  1000
dm3. A cubic decimeter, that is (1 dm)3, is commonly called a liter (L), which is a unit of
volume slightly larger than a quart. As shown in Fig. 1.6, 1000 liters are contained in a cube
with a volume of 1 cubic meter. Similarly, since 1 decimeter equals 10 centimeters (cm),
the liter can be divided into 1000 cubes each with a volume of 1 cubic centimeter:
1 liter  11 dm2 3  110 cm2 3  1000 cm3

1 cm

Also, since 1 cm3  1 milliliter (mL),

1 cm

FIGURE 1.6
The largest cube has sides 1 m in length
and a volume of 1 m3. The middle-sized
cube has sides 1 dm in length and a volume of 1 dm3, or 1 L. The smallest cube
has sides 1 cm in length and a volume of
1 cm3, or 1 mL.

1 liter  1000 cm3  1000 mL
Thus 1 liter contains 1000 cubic centimeters, or 1000 milliliters.
Chemical laboratory work frequently requires measurement of the volumes of liquids.
Several devices for the accurate determination of liquid volume are shown in Fig. 1.7.
An important point concerning measurements is the relationship between mass and
weight. Although these terms are sometimes used interchangeably, they are not the same.

TABLE 1.2 The Preﬁxes Used in the SI System (Those most commonly
encountered are shown in blue.)

TABLE 1.3 Some Examples of
Commonly Used Units

Preﬁx

Symbol

Meaning

Exponential
Notation*

exa
peta
tera
giga
mega
kilo
hecto
deka
—
deci
centi
milli
micro
nano
pico
femto
atto

E
P
T
G
M
k
h
da
—
d
c
m
␮
n
p
f
a

1,000,000,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000
1,000,000
1,000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.000001
0.000000001
0.000000000001
0.000000000000001
0.000000000000000001

1018
1015
1012
109
106
103
102
101
100
101
102
103
106
109
1012
1015
1018

*See Appendix 1.1 if you need a review of exponential notation.

Length

A dime is 1 mm thick.
A quarter is 2.5 cm in
diameter.
The average height of an
adult man is 1.8 m.

Mass

A nickel has a mass of
about 5 g.
A 120-lb person has a
mass of about 55 kg.

Volume

A 12-oz can of soda
has a volume of about
360 mL.

10

mL
100

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

Calibration
mark indicates
25-mL volume

mL
0
1
2
3
4

90

Calibration
mark indicates
250-mL volume

80
70
60
50
40
Valve
(stopcock)
controls the
liquid flow

30
20
10

100-mL
graduated cylinder

25-mL pipet

44
45
46
47
48
49
50

50-mL buret

250-mL
volumetric flask

FIGURE 1.8
An electronic analytical balance.

FIGURE 1.7
Common types of laboratory equipment used to measure liquid volume.

20
mL
20

Mass is a measure of the resistance of an object to a change in its state of motion. Mass
is measured by the force necessary to give an object a certain acceleration. On earth we
use the force that gravity exerts on an object to measure its mass. We call this force the
object’s weight. Since weight is the response of mass to gravity, it varies with the strength
of the gravitational ﬁeld. Therefore, your body mass is the same on the earth or on the
moon, but your weight would be much less on the moon than on earth because of the
moon’s smaller gravitational ﬁeld.
Because weighing something on a chemical balance (see Fig. 1.8) involves comparing the mass of that object to a standard mass, the terms weight and mass are sometimes
used interchangeably, although this is incorrect.

21
22
23
24
25

FIGURE 1.9
Measurement of volume using a buret. The
volume is read at the bottom of the liquid
curve (called the meniscus).

1.4

Uncertainty in Measurement

The number associated with a measurement is obtained using some measuring device. For
example, consider the measurement of the volume of a liquid using a buret (shown in Fig. 1.9
with the scale greatly magniﬁed). Notice that the meniscus of the liquid occurs at about
20.15 milliliters. This means that about 20.15 mL of liquid has been delivered from the buret (if the initial position of the liquid meniscus was 0.00 mL). Note that we must estimate
the last number of the volume reading by interpolating between the 0.1-mL marks. Since
the last number is estimated, its value may be different if another person makes the same
measurement. If ﬁve different people read the same volume, the results might be as follows:
Person

Results of Measurement

1
2
3
4
5

20.15 mL
20.14 mL
20.16 mL
20.17 mL
20.16 mL

1.4 Uncertainty in Measurement

A measurement always has some degree
of uncertainty.

Uncertainty in measurement is discussed
in more detail in Appendix 1.5.

Sample Exercise 1.1

11

These results show that the ﬁrst three numbers (20.1) remain the same regardless of who
makes the measurement; these are called certain digits. However, the digit to the right of
the 1 must be estimated and therefore varies; it is called an uncertain digit. We customarily report a measurement by recording all the certain digits plus the ﬁrst uncertain digit.
In our example it would not make any sense to try to record the volume of thousandths
of a milliliter because the value for hundredths of a milliliter must be estimated when
using the buret.
It is very important to realize that a measurement always has some degree of uncertainty. The uncertainty of a measurement depends on the precision of the measuring device. For example, using a bathroom scale, you might estimate the mass of a grapefruit
to be approximately 1.5 pounds. Weighing the same grapefruit on a highly precise balance might produce a result of 1.476 pounds. In the ﬁrst case, the uncertainty occurs in
the tenths of a pound place; in the second case, the uncertainty occurs in the thousandths
of a pound place. Suppose we weigh two similar grapefruits on the two devices and obtain
the following results:

Bathroom Scale

Balance

Grapefruit 1

1.5 lb

1.476 lb

Grapefruit 2

1.5 lb

1.518 lb

Do the two grapefruits have the same mass? The answer depends on which set of results
you consider. Thus a conclusion based on a series of measurements depends on the certainty of those measurements. For this reason, it is important to indicate the uncertainty
in any measurement. This is done by always recording the certain digits and the ﬁrst uncertain digit (the estimated number). These numbers are called the signiﬁcant ﬁgures of
a measurement.
The convention of signiﬁcant ﬁgures automatically indicates something about the uncertainty in a measurement. The uncertainty in the last number (the estimated number)
is usually assumed to be 1 unless otherwise indicated. For example, the measurement
1.86 kilograms can be taken to mean 1.86  0.01 kilograms.

Uncertainty in Measurement
In analyzing a sample of polluted water, a chemist measured out a 25.00-mL water sample
with a pipet (see Fig. 1.7). At another point in the analysis, the chemist used a graduated
cylinder (see Fig. 1.7) to measure 25 mL of a solution. What is the difference between
the measurements 25.00 mL and 25 mL?
Solution
Even though the two volume measurements appear to be equal, they really convey
different information. The quantity 25 mL means that the volume is between 24 mL and
26 mL, whereas the quantity 25.00 mL means that the volume is between 24.99 mL and
25.01 mL. The pipet measures volume with much greater precision than does the graduated cylinder.
See Question 1.8.
When making a measurement, it is important to record the results to the appropriate
number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures. For example, if a certain buret can be read to 0.01 mL,

12

Chapter One Chemical Foundations
you should record a reading of twenty-ﬁve milliliters as 25.00 mL, not 25 mL. This way
at some later time when you are using your results to do calculations, the uncertainty in
the measurement will be known to you.

Precision and Accuracy
Two terms often used to describe the reliability of measurements are precision and accuracy. Although these words are frequently used interchangeably in everyday life, they have
different meanings in the scientiﬁc context. Accuracy refers to the agreement of a particular value with the true value. Precision refers to the degree of agreement among several measurements of the same quantity. Precision reﬂects the reproducibility of a given
type of measurement. The difference between these terms is illustrated by the results of
three different dart throws shown in Fig. 1.10.
Two different types of errors are illustrated in Fig. 1.10. A random error (also called
an indeterminate error) means that a measurement has an equal probability of being high
or low. This type of error occurs in estimating the value of the last digit of a measurement. The second type of error is called systematic error (or determinate error). This
type of error occurs in the same direction each time; it is either always high or always
low. Figure 1.10(a) indicates large random errors (poor technique). Figure 1.10(b) indicates small random errors but a large systematic error, and Figure 1.10(c) indicates small
random errors and no systematic error.
In quantitative work, precision is often used as an indication of accuracy; we assume
that the average of a series of precise measurements (which should “average out” the random errors because of their equal probability of being high or low) is accurate, or close
to the “true” value. However, this assumption is valid only if systematic errors are absent.
Suppose we weigh a piece of brass ﬁve times on a very precise balance and obtain the
following results:

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIGURE 1.10
The results of several dart throws show the
difference between precise and accurate.
(a) Neither accurate nor precise (large random errors). (b) Precise but not accurate
(small random errors, large systematic error).
(c) Bull’s-eye! Both precise and accurate
(small random errors, no systematic error).

Sample Exercise 1.2

Weighing

Result

1
2
3
4
5

2.486 g
2.487 g
2.485 g
2.484 g
2.488 g

Normally, we would assume that the true mass of the piece of brass is very close to
2.486 grams, which is the average of the ﬁve results:
2.486 g  2.487 g  2.485 g  2.484 g  2.488 g
 2.486 g
5
However, if the balance has a defect causing it to give a result that is consistently 1.000 gram
too high (a systematic error of 1.000 gram), then the measured value of 2.486 grams
would be seriously in error. The point here is that high precision among several measurements is an indication of accuracy only if systematic errors are absent.

Precision and Accuracy
To check the accuracy of a graduated cylinder, a student ﬁlled the cylinder to the 25-mL
mark using water delivered from a buret (see Fig. 1.7) and then read the volume delivered. Following are the results of ﬁve trials:

1.5 Signiﬁcant Figures and Calculations

Trial

Volume Shown by
Graduated Cylinder

Volume Shown
by the Buret

1
2
3
4
5

25 mL
25 mL
25 mL
25 mL
25 mL

26.54 mL
26.51 mL
26.60 mL
26.49 mL
26.57 mL

Average

25 mL

26.54 mL

13

Is the graduated cylinder accurate?
Solution
Precision is an indication of accuracy
only if there are no systematic errors.

The results of the trials show very good precision (for a graduated cylinder). The student
has good technique. However, note that the average value measured using the buret is signiﬁcantly different from 25 mL. Thus this graduated cylinder is not very accurate. It produces a systematic error (in this case, the indicated result is low for each measurement).
See Question 1.11.

1.5

Signiﬁcant Figures and Calculations

Calculating the ﬁnal result for an experiment usually involves adding, subtracting, multiplying, or dividing the results of various types of measurements. Since it is very important that the uncertainty in the ﬁnal result is known correctly, we have developed rules for
counting the signiﬁcant ﬁgures in each number and for determining the correct number
of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the ﬁnal result.

Rules for Counting Signiﬁcant Figures
1. Nonzero integers. Nonzero integers always count as signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
Leading zeros are never signiﬁcant
ﬁgures.
Captive zeros are always signiﬁcant
ﬁgures.
Trailing zeros are sometimes signiﬁcant
ﬁgures.

Exact numbers never limit the number of
signiﬁcant ﬁgures in a calculation.

Exponential notation is reviewed in
Appendix 1.1.

2. Zeros. There are three classes of zeros:
a. Leading zeros are zeros that precede all the nonzero digits. These do not count as
signiﬁcant ﬁgures. In the number 0.0025, the three zeros simply indicate the position of the decimal point. This number has only two signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
b. Captive zeros are zeros between nonzero digits. These always count as signiﬁcant
ﬁgures. The number 1.008 has four signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
c. Trailing zeros are zeros at the right end of the number. They are signiﬁcant only if
the number contains a decimal point. The number 100 has only one signiﬁcant
ﬁgure, whereas the number 1.00  102 has three signiﬁcant ﬁgures. The number
one hundred written as 100. also has three signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
3. Exact numbers. Many times calculations involve numbers that were not obtained using measuring devices but were determined by counting: 10 experiments, 3 apples,
8 molecules. Such numbers are called exact numbers. They can be assumed to have
an inﬁnite number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures. Other examples of exact numbers are the
2 in 2␲r (the circumference of a circle) and the 4 and the 3 in 43pr 3 (the volume of
a sphere). Exact numbers also can arise from deﬁnitions. For example, one inch is
deﬁned as exactly 2.54 centimeters. Thus, in the statement 1 in  2.54 cm, neither
the 2.54 nor the 1 limits the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures when used in a calculation.
Note that the number 1.00  102 above is written in exponential notation. This type
of notation has at least two advantages: the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures can be easily

14

Chapter One Chemical Foundations
indicated, and fewer zeros are needed to write a very large or very small number. For
example, the number 0.000060 is much more conveniently represented as 6.0  1025. (The
number has two signiﬁcant ﬁgures.)
Sample Exercise 1.3

Signiﬁcant Figures
Give the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures for each of the following results.
a. A student’s extraction procedure on tea yields 0.0105 g of caffeine.
b. A chemist records a mass of 0.050080 g in an analysis.
c. In an experiment a span of time is determined to be 8.050  103 s.
Solution
a. The number contains three signiﬁcant ﬁgures. The zeros to the left of the 1 are leading zeros and are not signiﬁcant, but the remaining zero (a captive zero) is signiﬁcant.
b. The number contains ﬁve signiﬁcant ﬁgures. The leading zeros (to the left of the 5) are
not signiﬁcant. The captive zeros between the 5 and the 8 are signiﬁcant, and the trailing zero to the right of the 8 is signiﬁcant because the number contains a decimal point.
c. This number has four signiﬁcant ﬁgures. Both zeros are signiﬁcant.
See Exercises 1.25 through 1.28.
To this point we have learned to count the signiﬁcant ﬁgures in a given number. Next,
we must consider how uncertainty accumulates as calculations are carried out. The detailed
analysis of the accumulation of uncertainties depends on the type of calculation involved
and can be complex. However, in this textbook we will employ the following simple rules
that have been developed for determining the appropriate number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in
the result of a calculation.

Rules for Signiﬁcant Figures in Mathematical Operations*
1. For multiplication or division, the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the result is the
same as the number in the least precise measurement used in the calculation. For
example, consider the calculation
Corrected
4.56  1.4  6.38 888888n

h

Limiting term has
two signiﬁcant
ﬁgures

6.4
h

Two signiﬁcant
ﬁgures

The product should have only two signiﬁcant ﬁgures, since 1.4 has two signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
2. For addition or subtraction, the result has the same number of decimal places as the
least precise measurement used in the calculation. For example, consider the sum
12.11
18.0 m Limiting term has one decimal place
1.013
Corrected
31.123 888888n
31.1
h

One decimal place

The correct result is 31.1, since 18.0 has only one decimal place.
*Although these simple rules work well for most cases, they can give misleading results in certain cases.
For more information, see L. M. Schwartz, “Propagation of Signiﬁcant Figures,” J. Chem. Ed. 62 (1985):
693; and H. Bradford Thompson, “Is 8C equal to 50F?” J. Chem. Ed. 68 (1991): 400.

1.5 Signiﬁcant Figures and Calculations

15

Note that for multiplication and division, signiﬁcant ﬁgures are counted. For addition
and subtraction, the decimal places are counted.
In most calculations you will need to round numbers to obtain the correct number of
signiﬁcant ﬁgures. The following rules should be applied when rounding.

Rules for Rounding
1. In a series of calculations, carry the extra digits through to the ﬁnal result, then round.

Rule 2 is consistent with the operation of
electronic calculators.

2. If the digit to be removed
a. is less than 5, the preceding digit stays the same. For example, 1.33 rounds to 1.3.
b. is equal to or greater than 5, the preceding digit is increased by 1. For example,
1.36 rounds to 1.4.

Although rounding is generally straightforward, one point requires special emphasis.
As an illustration, suppose that the number 4.348 needs to be rounded to two signiﬁcant
ﬁgures. In doing this, we look only at the ﬁrst number to the right of the 3:
4.348

h
Look at this number to
round to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures.

Do not round sequentially. The number
6.8347 rounded to three signiﬁcant
ﬁgures is 6.83, not 6.84.

Sample Exercise 1.4

The number is rounded to 4.3 because 4 is less than 5. It is incorrect to round sequentially.
For example, do not round the 4 to 5 to give 4.35 and then round the 3 to 4 to give 4.4.
When rounding, use only the ﬁrst number to the right of the last signiﬁcant ﬁgure.
It is important to note that Rule 1 above usually will not be followed in the Sample Exercises in this text because we want to show the correct number of signiﬁcant
ﬁgures in each step of a problem. This same practice is followed for the detailed
solutions given in the Solutions Guide. However, as stated in Rule 1, the best procedure is to carry extra digits throughout a series of calculations and round to the correct
number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures only at the end. This is the practice you should follow.
The fact that your rounding procedures are different from those used in this text must
be taken into account when you check your answer with the one given at the end of
the book or in the Solutions Guide. Your answer (based on rounding only at the end
of a calculation) may differ in the last place from that given here as the “correct”
answer because we have rounded after each step. To help you understand the difference between these rounding procedures, we will consider them further in Sample
Exercise 1.4.

Signiﬁcant Figures in Mathematical Operations
Carry out the following mathematical operations, and give each result with the correct
number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
a. 1.05  103  6.135
b. 21  13.8
c. As part of a lab assignment to determine the value of the gas constant (R), a student
measured the pressure (P), volume (V), and temperature (T ) for a sample of gas, where
R

PV
T

The following values were obtained: P  2.560, T  275.15, and V  8.8. (Gases will be
discussed in detail in Chapter 5; we will not be concerned at this time about the units for
these quantities.) Calculate R to the correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures.

16

Chapter One Chemical Foundations
Solution
a. The result is 1.71  104, which has three signiﬁcant ﬁgures because the term with
the least precision (1.05  103) has three signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
b. The result is 7 with no decimal point because the number with the least number of
decimal places (21) has none.
c.

R

12.560218.82
PV

T
275.15

The correct procedure for obtaining the ﬁnal result can be represented as follows:
12.560218.82
22.528

 0.0818753
275.15
275.15
 0.082  8.2  102  R

This number must be rounded to two
signiﬁcant ﬁgures.

The ﬁnal result must be rounded to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures because 8.8 (the least precise
measurement) has two signiﬁcant ﬁgures. To show the effects of rounding at intermediate steps, we will carry out the calculation as follows:
Rounded to two
signiﬁcant ﬁgures
g

12.560218.82
22.528
23


275.15
275.15
275.15
Now we proceed with the next calculation:
23
 0.0835908
275.15
Rounded to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures, this result is
0.084  8.4  102

Note that intermediate rounding gives a signiﬁcantly different result than was obtained by
rounding only at the end. Again, we must reemphasize that in your calculations you should
round only at the end. However, because rounding is carried out at intermediate steps in
this text (to always show the correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures), the ﬁnal answer given
in the text may differ slightly from the one you obtain (rounding only at the end).
See Exercises 1.31 through 1.34.
There is a useful lesson to be learned from part c of Sample Exercise 1.4. The student measured the pressure and temperature to greater precision than the volume. A more
precise value of R (one with more signiﬁcant ﬁgures) could have been obtained if a more
precise measurement of V had been made. As it is, the efforts expended to measure P and
T very precisely were wasted. Remember that a series of measurements to obtain some
ﬁnal result should all be done to about the same precision.
TABLE 1.4 English–Metric
Equivalents
Length

1 m  1.094 yd
2.54 cm  1 in

Mass

1 kg  2.205 lb
453.6 g  1 lb

Volume

1 L  1.06 qt
1 ft3  28.32 L

1.6

Dimensional Analysis

It is often necessary to convert a given result from one system of units to another. The
best way to do this is by a method called the unit factor method, or more commonly
dimensional analysis. To illustrate the use of this method, we will consider several unit
conversions. Some equivalents in the English and metric systems are listed in Table 1.4.
A more complete list of conversion factors given to more signiﬁcant ﬁgures appears in
Appendix 6.

1.6 Dimensional Analysis

17

Consider a pin measuring 2.85 centimeters in length. What is its length in inches? To
accomplish this conversion, we must use the equivalence statement
2.54 cm  1 in
If we divide both sides of this equation by 2.54 centimeters, we get
1

1 in
2.54 cm

This expression is called a unit factor. Since 1 inch and 2.54 centimeters are exactly equivalent, multiplying any expression by this unit factor will not change its value.
The pin has a length of 2.85 centimeters. Multiplying this length by the appropriate
unit factor gives
2.85 cm 

1 in
2.85

in  1.12 in
2.54 cm
2.54

Note that the centimeter units cancel to give inches for the result. This is exactly what we
wanted to accomplish. Note also that the result has three signiﬁcant ﬁgures, as required
by the number 2.85. Recall that the 1 and 2.54 in the conversion factor are exact numbers
by deﬁnition.
Sample Exercise 1.5

Unit Conversions I
A pencil is 7.00 in long. What is its length in centimeters?
Solution
In this case we want to convert from inches to centimeters. Therefore, we must use the
reciprocal of the unit factor used above to do the opposite conversion:
7.00 in 

2.54 cm
 17.00212.542 cm  17.8 cm
1 in

Here the inch units cancel, leaving centimeters, as requested.
See Exercises 1.37 and 1.38.
Note that two unit factors can be derived from each equivalence statement. For
example, from the equivalence statement 2.54 cm  1 in, the two unit factors are
2.54 cm
1 in
Consider the direction of the required
change to select the correct unit factor.

and

1 in
2.54 cm

How do you choose which one to use in a given situation? Simply look at the direction
of the required change. To change from inches to centimeters, the inches must cancel.
Thus the factor 2.54 cm/1 in is used. To change from centimeters to inches, centimeters
must cancel, and the factor 1 in/2.54 cm is appropriate.

Converting from One Unit to Another
䊉

To convert from one unit to another, use the equivalence statement that relates the
two units.

䊉

Derive the appropriate unit factor by looking at the direction of the required change
(to cancel the unwanted units).

䊉

Multiply the quantity to be converted by the unit factor to give the quantity with the
desired units.

18

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

Sample Exercise 1.6

Unit Conversions II
You want to order a bicycle with a 25.5-in frame, but the sizes in the catalog are given
only in centimeters. What size should you order?
Solution
You need to go from inches to centimeters, so 2.54 cm  1 in is appropriate:
25.5 in 

2.54 cm
 64.8 cm
1 in
See Exercises 1.37 and 1.38.

To ensure that the conversion procedure is clear, a multistep problem is considered
in Sample Exercise 1.7.
Sample Exercise 1.7

Unit Conversions III
A student has entered a 10.0-km run. How long is the run in miles?
Solution
This conversion can be accomplished in several different ways. Since we have the equivalence statement 1 m  1.094 yd, we will proceed by a path that uses this fact. Before
we start any calculations, let us consider our strategy. We have kilometers, which we want
to change to miles. We can do this by the following route:
kilometers ¡ meters ¡ yards ¡ miles
To proceed in this way, we need the following equivalence statements:
1 km  1000 m
1 m  1.094 yd
1760 yd  1 mi
To make sure the process is clear, we will proceed step by step:
Kilometers to Meters:
10.0 km 

1000 m
 1.00  104 m
1 km

Meters to Yards:
1.00  104 m 

1.094 yd
 1.094  104 yd
1m

Note that we should have only three signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the result. Since this is an intermediate result, however, we will carry the extra digit. Remember, round off only the ﬁnal result.
Yards to Miles:
Normally we round to the correct number
of signiﬁcant ﬁgures after each step.
However, you should round only at the
end.

1.094  104 yd 

1 mi
 6.216 mi
1760 yd

Note in this case that 1 mi equals exactly 1760 yd by designation. Thus 1760 is an exact
number.
Since the distance was originally given as 10.0 km, the result can have only three signiﬁcant ﬁgures and should be rounded to 6.22 mi. Thus
10.0 km  6.22 mi

1.7 Temperature

19

Alternatively, we can combine the steps:
10.0 km 

1.094 yd
1000 m
1 mi


 6.22 mi
1 km
1m
1760 yd
See Exercises 1.37 and 1.38.

In using dimensional analysis, your veriﬁcation that everything has been done correctly is that you end up with the correct units. In doing chemistry problems, you should
always include the units for the quantities used. Always check to see that the units cancel
to give the correct units for the ﬁnal result. This provides a very valuable check, especially for complicated problems.
Study the procedures for unit conversions in the following Sample Exercises.
Sample Exercise 1.8

Unit Conversion IV
The speed limit on many highways in the United States is 55 mi/h. What number would
be posted in kilometers per hour?
Solution

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Result obtained by
rounding only at the
end of the calculation

8n
8888

1760 yd
55 mi
1m
1 km



 88 km/h
h
1 mi
1.094 yd
1000 m
Note that all units cancel except the desired kilometers per hour.

See Exercises 1.43 through 1.45.

Unit Conversions V
A Japanese car is advertised as having a gas mileage of 15 km/L. Convert this rating to
miles per gallon.
Solution

Result obtained by
rounding only at the
end of the calculation

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Sample Exercise 1.9

n

1.094 yd
4 qt
15 km
1000 m
1 mi
1L





 35 mi/gal
L
1 km
1m
1760 yd
1.06 qt
1 gal
See Exercise 1.46.

1.7

Temperature

Three systems for measuring temperature are widely used: the Celsius scale, the Kelvin
scale, and the Fahrenheit scale. The ﬁrst two temperature systems are used in the physical sciences, and the third is used in many of the engineering sciences. Our purpose here
is to deﬁne the three temperature scales and show how conversions from one scale to
another can be performed. Although these conversions can be carried out routinely on
most calculators, we will consider the process in some detail here to illustrate methods of
problem solving.
The three temperature scales are deﬁned and compared in Fig. 1.11. Note that the
size of the temperature unit (the degree) is the same for the Kelvin and Celsius scales.

20

Chapter One Chemical Foundations
Celsius

Fahrenheit
Boiling
point
of water

Freezing
point
of water

100°C

212°F
100
Celsius
degrees

180
Fahrenheit
degrees

Kelvin

373.15 K

100
kelvins

32°F

0°C

273.15 K

– 40°F

– 40°C

233.15 K

FIGURE 1.11
The three major temperature scales.

The fundamental difference between these two temperature scales is in their zero points.
Conversion between these two scales simply requires an adjustment for the different zero
points.
Temperature 1Kelvin2  temperature 1Celsius2  273.15

TK  TC  273.15
or
TC  TK  273.15

Temperature 1Celsius2  temperature 1Kelvin2  273.15
For example, to convert 300.00 K to the Celsius scale, we do the following calculation:
300.00  273.15  26.85°C
Note that in expressing temperature in Celsius units, the designation C is used.
The degree symbol is not used when writing temperature in terms of the Kelvin
scale. The unit of temperature on this scale is called a kelvin and is symbolized by the
letter K.
Converting between the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales is somewhat more complicated
because both the degree sizes and the zero points are different. Thus we need to consider
two adjustments: one for degree size and one for the zero point. First, we must account
for the difference in degree size. This can be done by reconsidering Fig. 1.11. Notice that
since 212F  100C and 32F  0C,
212  32  180 Fahrenheit degrees  100  0  100 Celsius degrees
Thus 180 on the Fahrenheit scale is equivalent to 100 on the Celsius scale, and the unit
factor is
180°F
100°C

or

9°F
5°C

or the reciprocal, depending on the direction in which we need to go.
Next, we must consider the different zero points. Since 32F  0C, we obtain the corresponding Celsius temperature by ﬁrst subtracting 32 from the Fahrenheit temperature

1.7 Temperature

21

to account for the different zero points. Then the unit factor is applied to adjust for the
difference in the degree size. This process is summarized by the equation
1TF  32°F2

5°C
 TC
9°F

(1.1)

where TF and TC represent a given temperature on the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales,
respectively. In the opposite conversion, we ﬁrst correct for degree size and then correct for
the different zero point. This process can be summarized in the following general equation:
TF  TC 

Understand the process of converting
from one temperature scale to another;
do not simply memorize the equations.

Sample Exercise 1.10

9°F
 32°F
5°C

(1.2)

Equations (1.1) and (1.2) are really the same equation in different forms. See if you can
obtain Equation (1.2) by starting with Equation (1.1) and rearranging.
At this point it is worthwhile to weigh the two alternatives for learning to do temperature conversions: You can simply memorize the equations, or you can take the time
to learn the differences between the temperature scales and to understand the processes
involved in converting from one scale to another. The latter approach may take a little
more effort, but the understanding you gain will stick with you much longer than the memorized formulas. This choice also will apply to many of the other chemical concepts. Try
to think things through!

Temperature Conversions I
Normal body temperature is 98.6°F. Convert this temperature to the Celsius and Kelvin
scales.
Solution
Rather than simply using the formulas to solve this problem, we will proceed by thinking it through. The situation is diagramed in Fig. 1.12. First, we want to convert 98.6°F
to the Celsius scale. The number of Fahrenheit degrees between 32.0°F and 98.6°F is
66.6°F. We must convert this difference to Celsius degrees:
66.6°F 

5°C
 37.0°C
9°F
Kelvin

Celsius

Fahrenheit

A physician taking the temperature of a
patient.
98.6°F

66.6°F

32°F

FIGURE 1.12
Normal body temperature on the Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin scales.

?°C

66.6°F ×

0°C

?K

5°C
= 37.0°C
9°F

37.0 + 273.15 K = 310.2 K

273.15 K

22

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Faux Snow

S

kiing is challenging and fun, but it is also big business.
Both skiers and ski operators want the season to last as
long as possible. The major factor in maximizing the
length of the ski season and in salvaging dry periods during the winter is the ability to “make snow.” Machinemade snow is now a required part of maintaining ideal
conditions at major ski areas such as Aspen, Breckenridge,
and Taos.
Snow is relatively easy to make if the air is cold enough.
To manufacture snow, water is cooled to just above 0C and
then pumped at high pressure through a “gun” that produces
a ﬁne mist of water droplets that freeze before dropping to
the ground. As might be expected, atmospheric conditions
are critical when making snow. With an air temperature of
8C (18F) or less, untreated water can be used in the
snow guns. However, the ideal type of snow for skiing is
“powder”—ﬂuffy snow made up of small, individual crystals. To achieve powdery snow requires sufﬁcient nucleation

sites—that is, sites where crystal growth is initiated. This
condition can be achieved by “doping” the water with ions
such as calcium or magnesium or with ﬁne particles of clay.
Also, when the air temperature is between 0C and 8C,
materials such as silver iodide, detergents, and organic materials may be added to the water to seed the snow.
A discovery at the University of Wisconsin in the 1970s
led to the additive most commonly used for snow making.
The Wisconsin scientists found that a bacterium (Pseudomanas syringae) commonly found in nature makes a protein that acts as a very effective nucleation site for ice formation. In fact, this discovery helped to explain why ice
forms at 0C on the blossoms of fruit trees instead of the
water supercooling below 0C, as pure water does when the
temperature is lowered slowly below the freezing point. To
help protect fruit blossoms from freeze damage, this bacterium has been genetically modiﬁed to remove the ice
nucleation protein. As a result, fruit blossoms can survive

Thus 98.6°F corresponds to 37.0°C.
Now we can convert to the Kelvin scale:
TK  TC  273.15  37.0  273.15  310.2 K
Note that the ﬁnal answer has only one decimal place (37.0 is limiting).
See Exercises 1.49, 1.51, and 1.52.
Sample Exercise 1.11

Temperature Conversions II
One interesting feature of the Celsius and Fahrenheit scales is that 40°C and 40°F
represent the same temperature, as shown in Fig. 1.11. Verify that this is true.
Solution
The difference between 32°F and 40°F is 72°F. The difference between 0°C and 40°C
is 40°C. The ratio of these is
72°F
8  9°F
9°F


40°C
8  5°C
5°C
as required. Thus 40°C is equivalent to 40°F.
See Challenge Problem 1.86.
Since, as shown in Sample Exercise 1.11, 40 on both the Fahrenheit and Celsius
scales represents the same temperature, this point can be used as a reference point (like
0C and 32F) for a relationship between the two scales:
TF  1402
Number of Fahrenheit degrees
9°F


Number of Celsius degrees
TC  1402
5°C

1.7 Temperature

intact even if the temperature brieﬂy falls below 0C. (See
the Chemical Impact on Organisms and Ice Formation on
page 516.) For snow-making purposes, this protein forms
the basis for Snowmax (prepared and sold by York Snow
of Victor, New York), which is the most popular additive
for snow making.
Obviously, snow cannot be made in the summer, so
what is a skiing fanatic to do during the warm months?
The answer is “dryslope” skiing. Although materials for
dryslopes can be manufactured in a variety of ways, polymers are most commonly used for this application. One
company that makes a multilayer polymer for artiﬁcial ski
slopes is Briton Engineering Developments (Yorkshire,
England), the producer of Snowﬂex. Snowﬂex consists of
a slippery polymer ﬁber placed on top of a shock-absorbing
base and lubricated by misting water through holes in its
surface. Of course, this virtual skiing is not much like the
real thing but it does provide some relief for summer ski
withdrawal.
As artiﬁcial and synthetic snow amply demonstrate,
chemistry makes life more fun.

or

23

A freestyle ski area at Shefﬁeld Ski Village, in England, uses Snowﬂex
“virtual snow” for year-round fun.

TF  40
9°F

TC  40
5°C

(1.3)

where TF and TC represent the same temperature (but not the same number). This equation
can be used to convert Fahrenheit temperatures to Celsius, and vice versa, and may be
easier to remember than Equations (1.1) and (1.2).

Sample Exercise 1.12

Temperature Conversions III
Liquid nitrogen, which is often used as a coolant for low-temperature experiments, has a
boiling point of 77 K. What is this temperature on the Fahrenheit scale?
Solution
We will ﬁrst convert 77 K to the Celsius scale:
TC  TK  273.15  77  273.15  196°C
To convert to the Fahrenheit scale, we will use Equation (1.3):

Liquid nitrogen is so cold that water
condenses out of the surrounding air,
forming a cloud as the nitrogen is poured.

TF  40
9°F

TC  40
5°C
TF  40
TF  40
9°F


196°C  40
156°C
5°C
9°F
TF  40 
1156°C2  281°F
5°C
TF  281°F  40  321°F
See Exercises 1.49, 1.51, and 1.52.

24

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

1.8

Density

A property of matter that is often used by chemists as an “identiﬁcation tag” for a substance is density, the mass of substance per unit volume of the substance:
Density 

mass
volume

The density of a liquid can be determined easily by weighing an accurately known volume
of liquid. This procedure is illustrated in Sample Exercise 1.13.

Sample Exercise 1.13

Determining Density
A chemist, trying to identify the main component of a compact disc cleaning ﬂuid, ﬁnds
that 25.00 cm3 of the substance has a mass of 19.625 g at 20°C. The following are the
names and densities of the compounds that might be the main component:

Compound

Density in g/cm3 at 20C

Chloroform
Diethyl ether
Ethanol
Isopropyl alcohol
Toluene

1.492
0.714
0.789
0.785
0.867

Which of these compounds is the most likely to be the main component of the compact
disc cleaner?
Solution
There are two ways of indicating units
that occur in the denominator. For
example, we can write g/cm3 or g cm3.
Although we will use the former system
here, the other system is widely used.

To identify the unknown substance, we must determine its density. This can be done by
using the deﬁnition of density:
Density 

19.625g
mass

 0.7850 g/cm3
volume
25.00 cm3

This density corresponds exactly to that of isopropyl alcohol, which is therefore the most
likely main component of the cleaner. However, note that the density of ethanol is also
very close. To be sure that the compound is isopropyl alcohol, we should run several more
density experiments. (In the modern laboratory, many other types of tests could be done
to distinguish between these two liquids.)
See Exercises 1.55 and 1.56.
Besides being a tool for the identiﬁcation of substances, density has many other uses.
For example, the liquid in your car’s lead storage battery (a solution of sulfuric acid)
changes density because the sulfuric acid is consumed as the battery discharges. In a fully
charged battery, the density of the solution is about 1.30 g/cm3. If the density falls below
1.20 g/cm3, the battery will have to be recharged. Density measurement is also used to
determine the amount of antifreeze, and thus the level of protection against freezing, in
the cooling system of a car.
The densities of various common substances are given in Table 1.5.

1.9 Classiﬁcation of Matter

TABLE 1.5

25

Densities of Various Common Substances* at 20C

Substance
Oxygen
Hydrogen
Ethanol
Benzene
Water
Magnesium
Salt (sodium chloride)
Aluminum
Iron
Copper
Silver
Lead
Mercury
Gold

Physical State

Density (g/cm3)

Gas
Gas
Liquid
Liquid
Liquid
Solid
Solid
Solid
Solid
Solid
Solid
Solid
Liquid
Solid

0.00133
0.000084
0.789
0.880
0.9982
1.74
2.16
2.70
7.87
8.96
10.5
11.34
13.6
19.32

*At 1 atmosphere pressure

1.9

Visualizations:
Structure of a Gas
Structure of a Liquid
Structure of a Solid

Visualization: Comparison of
a Compound and a Mixture

Visualization: Comparison of
a Solution and a Mixture

Visualization: Homogeneous
Mixtures: Air and Brass)

Classiﬁcation of Matter

Before we can hope to understand the changes we see going on around us—the growth
of plants, the rusting of steel, the aging of people, rain becoming more acidic—we must
ﬁnd out how matter is organized. Matter, best deﬁned as anything occupying space and
having mass, is the material of the universe. Matter is complex and has many levels of
organization. In this section we introduce basic ideas about the structure of matter and its
behavior.
We will start by considering the deﬁnitions of the fundamental properties of matter.
Matter exists in three states: solid, liquid, and gas. A solid is rigid; it has a ﬁxed volume
and shape. A liquid has a deﬁnite volume but no speciﬁc shape; it assumes the shape of
its container. A gas has no ﬁxed volume or shape; it takes on the shape and volume of its
container. In contrast to liquids and solids, which are only slightly compressible, gases
are highly compressible; it is relatively easy to decrease the volume of a gas. Molecularlevel pictures of the three states of water are given in Fig. 1.13. The different properties
of ice, liquid water, and steam are determined by the different arrangements of the molecules in these substances. Table 1.5 gives the states of some common substances at 20C
and 1 atmosphere of pressure.
Most of the matter around us consists of mixtures of pure substances. Wood, gasoline, wine, soil, and air are all mixtures. The main characteristic of a mixture is that it has
variable composition. For example, wood is a mixture of many substances, the proportions of which vary depending on the type of wood and where it grows. Mixtures can be
classiﬁed as homogeneous (having visibly indistinguishable parts) or heterogeneous
(having visibly distinguishable parts).
A homogeneous mixture is called a solution. Air is a solution consisting of a mixture of gases. Wine is a complex liquid solution. Brass is a solid solution of copper
and zinc. Sand in water and iced tea with ice cubes are examples of heterogeneous
mixtures. Heterogeneous mixtures usually can be separated into two or more homogeneous mixtures or pure substances (for example, the ice cubes can be separated from
the tea).
Mixtures can be separated into pure substances by physical methods. A pure substance is one with constant composition. Water is a good illustration of these ideas.
As we will discuss in detail later, pure water is composed solely of H2O molecules,

26

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

FIGURE 1.13
The three states of water (where red
spheres represent oxygen atoms and
blue spheres represent hydrogen atoms).
(a) Solid: the water molecules are locked
into rigid positions and are close together.
(b) Liquid: the water molecules are still
close together but can move around to
some extent. (c) Gas: the water molecules
are far apart and move randomly.

The term volatile refers to the ease with
which a substance can be changed to its
vapor.

Solid (Ice)
(a)

Liquid (Water)
(b)

Gas (Steam)
(c)

but the water found in nature (groundwater or the water in a lake or ocean) is really a
mixture. Seawater, for example, contains large amounts of dissolved minerals. Boiling
seawater produces steam, which can be condensed to pure water, leaving the minerals
behind as solids. The dissolved minerals in seawater also can be separated out by freezing the mixture, since pure water freezes out. The processes of boiling and freezing
are physical changes: When water freezes or boils, it changes its state but remains
water; it is still composed of H2O molecules. A physical change is a change in the
form of a substance, not in its chemical composition. A physical change can be used
to separate a mixture into pure compounds, but it will not break compounds into
elements.
One of the most important methods for separating the components of a mixture is
distillation, a process that depends on differences in the volatility (how readily substances
become gases) of the components. In simple distillation, a mixture is heated in a device
such as that shown in Fig. 1.14. The most volatile component vaporizes at the lowest temperature, and the vapor passes through a cooled tube (a condenser), where it condenses
back into its liquid state.
The simple, one-stage distillation apparatus shown in Fig. 1.14 works very well when
only one component of the mixture is volatile. For example, a mixture of water and sand
is easily separated by boiling off the water. Water containing dissolved minerals behaves
in much the same way. As the water is boiled off, the minerals remain behind as nonvolatile
solids. Simple distillation of seawater using the sun as the heat source is an excellent way
to desalinate (remove the minerals from) seawater.
However, when a mixture contains several volatile components, the one-step distillation does not give a pure substance in the receiving ﬂask, and more elaborate methods are
required.
Another method of separation is simple ﬁltration, which is used when a mixture consists of a solid and a liquid. The mixture is poured onto a mesh, such as ﬁlter paper, which
passes the liquid and leaves the solid behind.

27

1.9 Classiﬁcation of Matter

Thermometer

Vapors

Condenser

Distilling
flask
Water out

Cool
water in
Burner

Receiving
flask
Distillate

FIGURE 1.14
Simple laboratory distillation apparatus. Cool water circulates through the outer portion of the condenser, causing vapors from the distilling ﬂask to
condense into a liquid. The nonvolatile component of the mixture remains in the distilling ﬂask.

A third method of separation is called chromatography. Chromatography is the general name applied to a series of methods that employ a system with two phases (states)
of matter: a mobile phase and a stationary phase. The stationary phase is a solid, and
the mobile phase is either a liquid or a gas. The separation process occurs because the components of the mixture have different afﬁnities for the two phases and thus move through
the system at different rates. A component with a high afﬁnity for the mobile phase moves
relatively quickly through the chromatographic system, whereas one with a high afﬁnity
for the solid phase moves more slowly.
One simple type of chromatography, paper chromatography, employs a strip of
porous paper, such as ﬁlter paper, for the stationary phase. A drop of the mixture to be
separated is placed on the paper, which is then dipped into a liquid (the mobile phase)
that travels up the paper as though it were a wick (see Fig. 1.15). This method of separating a mixture is often used by biochemists, who study the chemistry of living systems.
It should be noted that when a mixture is separated, the absolute purity of the separated
components is an ideal. Because water, for example, inevitably comes into contact with other
materials when it is synthesized or separated from a mixture, it is never absolutely pure.
With great care, however, substances can be obtained in very nearly pure form.
Pure substances contain compounds (combinations of elements) or free elements. A
compound is a substance with constant composition that can be broken down into elements
by chemical processes. An example of a chemical process is the electrolysis of water, in
which an electric current is passed through water to break it down into the free elements
hydrogen and oxygen. This process produces a chemical change because the water
molecules have been broken down. The water is gone, and in its place we have the
free elements hydrogen and oxygen. A chemical change is one in which a given substance becomes a new substance or substances with different properties and different

28

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

FIGURE 1.15
Paper chromatography of ink. (a) A line of
the mixture to be separated is placed at
one end of a sheet of porous paper. (b) The
paper acts as a wick to draw up the liquid.
(c) The component with the weakest attraction for the paper travels faster than the
components that cling to the paper.

(a)

(b)

(c)

composition. Elements are substances that cannot be decomposed into simpler substances
by chemical or physical means.
We have seen that the matter around us has various levels of organization. The most
fundamental substances we have discussed so far are elements. As we will see in later
chapters, elements also have structure: They are composed of atoms, which in turn are
composed of nuclei and electrons. Even the nucleus has structure: It is composed of protons and neutrons. And even these can be broken down further, into elementary particles
called quarks. However, we need not concern ourselves with such details at this point.
Figure 1.16 summarizes our discussion of the organization of matter.
The element mercury (top left) combines
with the element iodine (top right) to form
the compound mercuric iodide (bottom).
This is an example of a chemical change.

Matter

Heterogeneous
mixtures

Physical
methods

Homogeneous
mixtures (solutions)
Physical
methods
Pure substances

Compounds

Chemical
methods

Elements

Atoms

Nucleus

FIGURE 1.16
The organization of matter.

Electrons

Protons

Neutrons

Quarks

Quarks

For Review

Key Terms

For Review

Section 1.2
scientiﬁc method
measurement
hypothesis
theory
model
natural law
law of conservation of mass

Section 1.3
SI system
mass
weight

Section 1.4
uncertainty
signiﬁcant ﬁgures
accuracy
precision
random error
systematic error

Section 1.5
exponential notation

Section 1.6
unit factor method
dimensional analysis

Section 1.8
density

Section 1.9
matter
states (of matter)
homogeneous mixture
heterogeneous mixture
solution
pure substance
physical change
distillation
ﬁltration
chromatography
paper chromatography
compound
chemical change
element

29

Scientiﬁc method
䊉 Make observations
䊉 Formulate hypotheses
䊉 Perform experiments
Models (theories) are explanation of why nature behaves in a particular way.
䊉 They are subject to modiﬁcation over time and sometimes fail.
Quantitative observations are called measurements.
䊉 Consist of a number and a unit
䊉 Involve some uncertainty
䊉 Uncertainty is indicated by using signiﬁcant ﬁgures
• Rules to determine signiﬁcant ﬁgures
• Calculations using signiﬁcant ﬁgures
䊉 Preferred system is SI
Temperature conversions
䊉 TK  TC  273
5°C
䊉 TC  1TF  32°F2 a
b
9°F
5°F
䊉 T F  TC a
b  32°F
9°C
Density
䊉

Density 

mass
volume

Matter can exist in three states:
䊉 Solid
䊉 Liquid
䊉 Gas
Mixtures can be separated by methods involving only physical changes:
䊉 Distillation
䊉 Filtration
䊉 Chromatography
Compounds can be decomposed to elements only through chemical changes.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Deﬁne and explain the differences between the following terms.
a. law and theory
b. theory and experiment
c. qualitative and quantitative
d. hypothesis and theory
2. Is the scientiﬁc method suitable for solving problems only in the sciences? Explain.
3. Which of the following statements (hypotheses) could be tested by quantitative
measurement?
a. Ty Cobb was a better hitter than Pete Rose.
44
% pure.
b. Ivory soap is 99 100
c. Rolaids consumes 47 times its weight in excess stomach acid.

30

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

4. For each of the following pieces of glassware, provide a sample measurement
and discuss the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures and uncertainty.
5
11

4
3
2

30
20

1

10

a.

10

b.

c.

5. A student performed an analysis of a sample for its calcium content and got the
following results:
14.92%

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

14.91%

14.88%

14.91%

The actual amount of calcium in the sample is 15.70%. What conclusions can
you draw about the accuracy and precision of these results?
Compare and contrast the multiplication/division signiﬁcant ﬁgure rule to the
signiﬁcant ﬁgure rule applied for addition/subtraction mathematical operations.
Explain how density can be used as a conversion factor to convert the volume
of an object to the mass of the object, and vice versa.
On which temperature scale (F, C, or K) does 1 degree represent the smallest
change in temperature?
Distinguish between physical changes and chemical changes.
Why is the separation of mixtures into pure or relatively pure substances so important when performing a chemical analysis?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the learning
that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical concepts.

1. a. There are 365 days per year, 24 hours per day, 12 months per
year, and 60 minutes per hour. Use these data to determine how
many minutes are in a month.
b. Now use the following data to calculate the number of minutes in a month: 24 hours per day, 60 minutes per hour, 7 days
per week, and 4 weeks per month.
c. Why are these answers different? Which (if any) is more
correct? Why?
2. You go to a convenience store to buy candy and ﬁnd the owner
to be rather odd. He allows you to buy pieces in multiples of four,
and to buy four, you need $0.23. He only allows you to do this
by using 3 pennies and 2 dimes. You have a bunch of pennies and
dimes, and instead of counting them, you decide to weigh them.

You have 636.3 g of pennies, and each penny weighs 3.03 g. Each
dime weighs 2.29 g. Each piece of candy weighs 10.23 g.
a. How many pennies do you have?
b. How many dimes do you need to buy as much candy as possible?
c. How much should all these dimes weigh?
d. How many pieces of candy could you buy? (number of dimes
from part b)
e. How much would this candy weigh?
f. How many pieces of candy could you buy with twice as many
dimes?
3. When a marble is dropped into a beaker of water, it sinks to the
bottom. Which of the following is the best explanation?
a. The surface area of the marble is not large enough to be held
up by the surface tension of the water.
b. The mass of the marble is greater than that of the water.
c. The marble weighs more than an equivalent volume of the water.
d. The force from dropping the marble breaks the surface tension
of the water.
e. The marble has greater mass and volume than the water.

Questions

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Justify your choice, and for choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong about them.
You have two beakers, one ﬁlled to the 100-mL mark with sugar
(the sugar has a mass of 180.0 g) and the other ﬁlled to the 100-mL
mark with water (the water has a mass of 100.0 g). You pour all
the sugar and all the water together in a bigger beaker and stir
until the sugar is completely dissolved.
a. Which of the following is true about the mass of the solution?
Explain.
i. It is much greater than 280.0 g.
ii. It is somewhat greater than 280.0 g.
iii. It is exactly 280.0 g.
iv. It is somewhat less than 280.0 g.
v. It is much less than 280.0 g.
b. Which of the following is true about the volume of the solution? Explain.
i. It is much greater than 200.0 mL.
ii. It is somewhat greater than 200.0 mL.
iii. It is exactly 200.0 mL.
iv. It is somewhat less than 200.0 mL.
v. It is much less than 200.0 mL.
You may have noticed that when water boils, you can see bubbles
that rise to the surface of the water.
a. What is inside these bubbles?
i. air
ii. hydrogen and oxygen gas
iii. oxygen gas
iv. water vapor
v. carbon dioxide gas
b. Is the boiling of water a chemical or physical change? Explain.
If you place a glass rod over a burning candle, the glass appears
to turn black. What is happening to each of the following (physical change, chemical change, both, or neither) as the candle
burns? Explain each answer.
a. the wax
b. the wick
c. the glass rod
Which characteristics of a solid, a liquid, and a gas are exhibited
by each of the following substances? How would you classify each
substance?
a. a bowl of pudding
b. a bucketful of sand
You have water in each graduated cylinder shown:

mL
5

mL
1

4

3
0.5
2

1

31

You then add both samples to a beaker. How would you write the
number describing the total volume? What limits the precision of
this number?
9. Paracelsus, a sixteenth-century alchemist and healer, adopted as
his slogan: “The patients are your textbook, the sickbed is your
study.” Is this view consistent with using the scientiﬁc method?
10. What is wrong with the following statement?
“The results of the experiment do not agree with the theory. Something must be wrong with the experiment.”
11. Why is it incorrect to say that the results of a measurement were
accurate but not precise?
12. What data would you need to estimate the money you would spend
on gasoline to drive your car from New York to Chicago? Provide estimates of values and a sample calculation.
13. Sketch two pieces of glassware: one that can measure volume to
the thousandths place and one that can measure volume only to
the ones place.
14. You have a 1.0-cm3 sample of lead and a 1.0-cm3 sample of glass.
You drop each in separate beakers of water. How do the volumes
of water displaced by each sample compare? Explain.
15. Sketch a magniﬁed view (showing atoms/molecules) of each of
the following and explain:
a. a heterogeneous mixture of two different compounds
b. a homogeneous mixture of an element and a compound
16. You are driving 65 mi/h and take your eyes off the road for “just
a second.” What distance (in feet) do you travel in this time?
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
17. The difference between a law and a theory is the difference
between what and why. Explain.
18. Explain the fundamental steps of the scientiﬁc method.
19. A measurement is a quantitative observation involving both a
number and a unit. What is a qualitative observation? What are
the SI units for mass, length, and volume? What is the assumed
uncertainty in a number (unless stated otherwise)? The uncertainty
of a measurement depends on the precision of the measuring
device. Explain.
20. To determine the volume of a cube, a student measured one of
the dimensions of the cube several times. If the true dimension of
the cube is 10.62 cm, give an example of four sets of measurements that would illustrate the following.
a. imprecise and inaccurate data
b. precise but inaccurate data
c. precise and accurate data
Give a possible explanation as to why data can be imprecise
or inaccurate. What is wrong with saying a set of measurements
is imprecise but accurate?
21. What are signiﬁcant ﬁgures? Show how to indicate the number
one thousand to 1 signiﬁcant ﬁgure, 2 signiﬁcant ﬁgures, 3
signiﬁcant ﬁgures, and 4 signiﬁcant ﬁgures. Why is the answer, to

32

Chapter One Chemical Foundations
the correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures, not 1.0 for the following
calculation?

1.5  1.0

0.50
22. What is the volume per unit mass equal to? What unit conversion
would the volume per unit mass be useful for?
23. When the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit (TF) is plotted versus the temperature in degrees Celsius (TC), a straight line plot results. A straight line plot also results when TC is plotted versus TK
(the temperature in degrees Kelvin). Reference Appendix A1.3
and determine the slope and y-intercept of each of these two plots.
24. Give four examples illustrating each of the following terms.
a. homogeneous mixture
d. element
b. heterogeneous mixture
e. physical change
c. compound
f. chemical change

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Signiﬁcant Figures and Unit Conversions
25. Which of the following are exact numbers?
a. There are 100 cm in 1 m.
b. One meter equals 1.094 yard.
c. We can use the equation
°F  95 °C  32
to convert from Celsius to Fahrenheit temperature. Are the
numbers 95 and 32 exact or inexact?
d. ␲  3.1415927.
26. Indicate the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in each of the following:
a. This book contains more than 1000 pages.
b. A mile is about 5300 ft.
c. A liter is equivalent to 1.059 qt.
d. The population of the United States is approaching 3.0  102
million.
e. A kilogram is 1000 g.
f. The Boeing 747 cruises at around 600 mi/h.
27. How many signiﬁcant ﬁgures are there in each of the following
values?
a. 6.07  1015
e. 463.8052
b. 0.003840
f. 300
c. 17.00
g. 301
d. 8  108
h. 300.
28. How many signiﬁcant ﬁgures are in each of the following?
a. 100
e. 0.0048
b. 1.0  102
f. 0.00480
c. 1.00  103
g. 4.80  103
d. 100.
h. 4.800  103
29. Round off each of the following numbers to the indicated number of signiﬁcant digits and write the answer in standard scientiﬁc notation.
a. 0.00034159 to three digits
b. 103.351  102 to four digits
c. 17.9915 to ﬁve digits
d. 3.365  105 to three digits

30. Use exponential notation to express the number 480 to
a. one signiﬁcant ﬁgure
b. two signiﬁcant ﬁgures
c. three signiﬁcant ﬁgures
d. four signiﬁcant ﬁgures
31. Evaluate each of the following and write the answer to the appropriate number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
a. 212.2  26.7  402.09
b. 1.0028  0.221  0.10337
c. 52.331  26.01  0.9981
d. 2.01  102  3.014  103
e. 7.255  6.8350
32. Perform the following mathematical operations, and express each
result to the correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
0.102  0.0821  273
a.
1.01
b. 0.14  6.022  1023
c. 4.0  104  5.021  103  7.34993  102
2.00  106
d.
3.00  107
33. Perform the following mathematical operations and express the
result to the correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
2.526
0.470
80.705
a.


3.1
0.623
0.4326
b. (6.404  2.91)(18.7  17.1)
c. 6.071  105  8.2  106  0.521  104
d. (3.8  1012  4.0  1013)(4  1012  6.3  1013)
9.5  4.1  2.8  3.175
e.
4
(Assume that this operation is taking the average of four numbers. Thus 4 in the denominator is exact.)
8.925  8.905
 100
f.
8.925
(This type of calculation is done many times in calculating a
percentage error. Assume that this example is such a calculation; thus 100 can be considered to be an exact number.)
34. Perform the following mathematical operations, and express the
result to the correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
a. 6.022  1023  1.05  102
6.6262  1034  2.998  108
b.
2.54  109
c. 1.285  102  1.24  103  1.879  101
d. 1.285  102  1.24  103
11.00866  1.007282
e.
6.02205  1023
9.875  102  9.795  102
f.
 100 1100 is exact2
9.875  102
9.42  102  8.234  102  1.625  103
g.
13 is exact2
3
35. Perform each of the following conversions.
a. 8.43 cm to millimeters
b. 2.41  102 cm to meters
c. 294.5 nm to centimeters
d. 1.445  104 m to kilometers

Exercises
e.
f.
36. a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

235.3 m to millimeters
903.3 nm to micrometers
How many kilograms are in one teragram?
How many nanometers are in 6.50  102 terameters?
How many kilograms are in 25 femtograms?
How many liters are in 8.0 cubic decimeters?
How many microliters are in one milliliter?
How many picograms are in one microgram?

37. Perform the following unit conversions.
a. Congratulations! You and your spouse are the proud parents of
a new baby, born while you are studying in a country that uses
the metric system. The nurse has informed you that the baby
weighs 3.91 kg and measures 51.4 cm. Convert your baby’s
weight to pounds and ounces and her length to inches (rounded
to the nearest quarter inch).
b. The circumference of the earth is 25,000 mi at the equator.
What is the circumference in kilometers? in meters?
c. A rectangular solid measures 1.0 m by 5.6 cm by 2.1 dm. Express its volume in cubic meters, liters, cubic inches, and cubic feet.
38. Perform the following unit conversions.
a. 908 oz to kilograms
b. 12.8 L to gallons
c. 125 mL to quarts
d. 2.89 gal to milliliters
e. 4.48 lb to grams
f. 550 mL to quarts
39. Use the following exact conversion factors to perform the stated
calculations:
512 yards  1 rod
40 rods  1 furlong
8 furlongs  1 mile
a. The Kentucky Derby race is 1.25 miles. How long is the race
in rods, furlongs, meters, and kilometers?
b. A marathon race is 26 miles, 385 yards. What is this distance
in rods, furlongs, meters, and kilometers?
40. Although the preferred SI unit of area is the square meter, land is
often measured in the metric system in hectares (ha). One hectare
is equal to 10,000 m2. In the English system, land is often measured in acres (1 acre  160 rod2). Use the exact conversions and
those given in Exercise 39 to calculate the following.
a. 1 ha  ________ km2.
b. The area of a 5.5-acre plot of land in hectares, square meters,
and square kilometers.
c. A lot with dimensions 120 ft by 75 ft is to be sold for $6500.
What is the price per acre? What is the price per hectare?
41. Precious metals and gems are measured in troy weights in the
English system:
24 grains  1 pennyweight 1exact2
20 pennyweight  1 troy ounce 1exact2
12 troy ounces  1 troy pound 1exact2
1 grain  0.0648 gram
1 carat  0.200 gram

a. The most common English unit of mass is the pound avoirdupois. What is one troy pound in kilograms and in pounds?

33

b. What is the mass of a troy ounce of gold in grams and in carats?
c. The density of gold is 19.3 g/cm3. What is the volume of a troy
pound of gold?
42. Apothecaries (druggists) use the following set of measures in the
English system:
20 grains ap  1 scruple 1exact2
3 scruples  1 dram ap 1exact2
8 dram ap  1 oz ap 1exact2
1 dram ap  3.888 g

a. Is an apothecary grain the same as a troy grain? (See Exercise 41.)
b. 1 oz ap  ________ oz troy.
c. An aspirin tablet contains 5.00  102 mg of active ingredient.
What mass in grains ap of active ingredient does it contain?
What mass in scruples?
d. What is the mass of 1 scruple in grams?
43. Science ﬁction often uses nautical analogies to describe space
travel. If the starship U.S.S. Enterprise is traveling at warp factor
1.71, what is its speed in knots and in miles per hour? (Warp 1.71 
5.00 times the speed of light; speed of light  3.00  108 m/s;
1 knot  2000 yd/h, exactly.)
44. The world record for the hundred meter dash is 9.77 s. What is the
corresponding average speed in units of m/s, km/h, ft/s, and mi/h?
At this speed, how long would it take to run 1.00  102 yards?
45. Would a car traveling at a constant speed of 65 km/h violate a
40. mi/h speed limit?
46. You pass a road sign saying “New York 112 km.” If you drive at
a constant speed of 65 mi/h, how long should it take you to reach
New York? If your car gets 28 miles to the gallon, how many liters
of gasoline are necessary to travel 112 km?
47. If you put 8.21 gallons of gas in your car and it cost you a total
of $17.25, what is the cost of gas per liter in Canadian dollars?
Assume 0.82 dollar U.S.  1.00 dollar Canadian.
48. A children’s pain relief elixir contains 80. mg acetaminophen per
0.50 teaspoon. The dosage recommended for a child who weighs
between 24 and 35 lb is 1.5 teaspoons. What is the range of
acetaminophen dosages, expressed in mg acetaminophen/kg body
weight, for children who weigh between 24 and 35 lb?

Temperature
49. Convert the following Fahrenheit temperatures to the Celsius and
Kelvin scales.
a. 459F, an extremely low temperature
b. 40.F, the answer to a trivia question
c. 68F, room temperature
d. 7  107 F, temperature required to initiate fusion reactions in
the sun
50. A thermometer gives a reading of 96.1F  0.2F. What is the
temperature in C? What is the uncertainty?
51. Convert the following Celsius temperatures to Kelvin and to
Fahrenheit degrees.
a. the temperature of someone with a fever, 39.2C
b. a cold wintery day, 25C
c. the lowest possible temperature, 273C
d. the melting-point temperature of sodium chloride, 801C

34

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

52. Convert the following Kelvin temperatures to Celsius and Fahrenheit degrees.
a. the temperature that registers the same value on both the
Fahrenheit and Celsius scales, 233 K
b. the boiling point of helium, 4 K
c. the temperature at which many chemical quantities are determined, 298 K
d. the melting point of tungsten, 3680 K

64. Using Table 1.5, calculate the volume of 25.0 g of each of the following substances at 1 atm.
a. hydrogen gas
b. water
c. iron
Chapter 5 discusses the properties of gases. One property unique
to gases is that they contain mostly empty space. Explain using
the results of your calculations.

Density

65. The density of osmium (the densest metal) is 22.57 g/cm3. If a
1.00-kg rectangular block of osmium has two dimensions of
4.00 cm  4.00 cm, calculate the third dimension of the block.
66. A copper wire (density  8.96 g/cm3) has a diameter of 0.25 mm.
If a sample of this copper wire has a mass of 22 g, how long is
the wire?

53. A material will ﬂoat on the surface of a liquid if the material has
a density less than that of the liquid. Given that the density of water is approximately 1.0 g/mL, will a block of material having a
volume of 1.2  104 in3 and weighing 350 lb ﬂoat or sink when
placed in a reservoir of water?
54. For a material to ﬂoat on the surface of water, the material must
have a density less than that of water (1.0 g/mL) and must not react with the water or dissolve in it. A spherical ball has a radius
of 0.50 cm and weighs 2.0 g. Will this ball ﬂoat or sink when
placed in water? (Note: Volume of a sphere  43 ␲r 3.)
55. A star is estimated to have a mass of 2  1036 kg. Assuming it to
be a sphere of average radius 7.0  105 km, calculate the average density of the star in units of grams per cubic centimeter.
56. A rectangular block has dimensions 2.9 cm  3.5 cm  10.0 cm.
The mass of the block is 615.0 g. What are the volume and density of the block?
57. Diamonds are measured in carats, and 1 carat  0.200 g. The density of diamond is 3.51 g/cm3. What is the volume of a 5.0-carat
diamond?
58. The volume of a diamond is found to be 2.8 mL. What is the mass
of the diamond in carats? (See Exercise 57.)
59. A sample containing 33.42 g of metal pellets is poured into a graduated cylinder initially containing 12.7 mL of water, causing the
water level in the cylinder to rise to 21.6 mL. Calculate the density of the metal.
60. The density of pure silver is 10.5 g/cm3 at 20C. If 5.25 g of pure
silver pellets is added to a graduated cylinder containing 11.2 mL
of water, to what volume level will the water in the cylinder rise?
61. In each of the following pairs, which has the greater mass? (See
Table 1.5.)
a. 1.0 kg of feathers or 1.0 kg of lead
b. 1.0 mL of mercury or 1.0 mL of water
c. 19.3 mL of water or 1.00 mL of gold
d. 75 mL of copper or 1.0 L of benzene
62. Mercury poisoning is a debilitating disease that is often fatal. In
the human body, mercury reacts with essential enzymes leading
to irreversible inactivity of these enzymes. If the amount of mercury in a polluted lake is 0.4 ␮g Hg/mL, what is the total mass
in kilograms of mercury in the lake? (The lake has a surface area
of 100 mi2 and an average depth of 20 ft.)
63. In
a.
b.
c.

each of the following pairs, which has the greater volume?
1.0 kg of feathers or 1.0 kg of lead
100 g of gold or 100 g of water
1.0 L of copper or 1.0 L of mercury

Classiﬁcation and Separation of Matter
67. Match each description below with the following microscopic pictures. More than one picture may ﬁt each description. A picture
may be used more than once or not used at all.

i

ii

iii

iv

v

vi

a. a gaseous compound
b. a mixture of two gaseous elements
c. a solid element
d. a mixture of a gaseous element and a gaseous compound
68. Deﬁne the following terms: solid, liquid, gas, pure substance, element, compound, homogeneous mixture, heterogeneous mixture,
solution, chemical change, physical change.
69. What is the difference between homogeneous and heterogeneous matter? Classify each of the following as homogeneous or
heterogeneous.
a. a door
b. the air you breathe
c. a cup of coffee (black)
d. the water you drink
e. salsa
f. your lab partner
70. Classify each of the following as a mixture or a pure substance.
a. water
f. uranium
b. blood
g. wine
c. the oceans
h. leather
d. iron
i. table salt (NaCl)
e. brass
Of the pure substances, which are elements and which are
compounds?

Challenge Problems
71. Classify following as physical or chemical changes.
a. Moth balls gradually vaporize in a closet.
b. Hydroﬂuoric acid attacks glass, and is used to etch calibration
marks on glass laboratory utensils.
c. A French chef making a sauce with brandy is able to burn off
the alcohol from the brandy, leaving just the brandy ﬂavoring.
d. Chemistry majors sometimes get holes in the cotton jeans they
wear to lab because of acid spills.
72. The properties of a mixture are typically averages of the properties of its components. The properties of a compound may differ
dramatically from the properties of the elements that combine to
produce the compound. For each process described below, state
whether the material being discussed is most likely a mixture or
a compound, and state whether the process is a chemical change
or a physical change.
a. An orange liquid is distilled, resulting in the collection of a
yellow liquid and a red solid.
b. A colorless, crystalline solid is decomposed, yielding a pale
yellow-green gas and a soft, shiny metal.
c. A cup of tea becomes sweeter as sugar is added to it.

35

solid is insoluble in benzene and that the density of benzene is
0.880 g/cm3, calculate the density of the solid.
79. For each of the following, decide which block is more dense: the
orange block, the blue block, or it cannot be determined. Explain
your answers.

a.

b.

c.

d.

Additional Exercises
73. For a pharmacist dispensing pills or capsules, it is often easier to
weigh the medication to be dispensed rather than to count the individual pills. If a single antibiotic capsule weighs 0.65 g, and a
pharmacist weighs out 15.6 g of capsules, how many capsules
have been dispensed?
74. In Shakespeare’s Richard III, the First Murderer says:
“Take that, and that! [Stabs Clarence]
If that is not enough, I’ll drown you in a malmsey butt within!”

75.

76.

77.

78.

Given that 1 butt  126 gal, in how many liters of malmsey (a
foul brew similar to mead) was the unfortunate Clarence about to
be drowned?
The contents of one 40. lb bag of topsoil will cover 10. square
feet of ground to a depth of 1.0 inch. What number of bags are
needed to cover a plot that measures 200. by 300. m to a depth
of 4.0 cm?
In the opening scenes of the movie Raiders of the Lost Ark,
Indiana Jones tries to remove a gold idol from a booby-trapped
pedestal. He replaces the idol with a bag of sand of approximately equal volume. (Density of gold  19.32 g/cm3; density of
sand  2 g/cm3.)
a. Did he have a reasonable chance of not activating the masssensitive booby trap?
b. In a later scene he and an unscrupulous guide play catch with
the idol. Assume that the volume of the idol is about 1.0 L. If
it were solid gold, what mass would the idol have? Is playing
catch with it plausible?
A column of liquid is found to expand linearly on heating 5.25 cm
for a 10.0F rise in temperature. If the initial temperature of the
liquid is 98.6F, what will the ﬁnal temperature be in C if the
liquid has expanded by 18.5 cm?
A 25.00-g sample of a solid is placed in a graduated cylinder and
then the cylinder is ﬁlled to the 50.0 mL mark with benzene. The
mass of benzene and solid together is 58.80 g. Assuming that the

80. According to the Ofﬁcial Rules of Baseball, a baseball must have
a circumference not more than 9.25 in or less than 9.00 in and a
mass not more than 5.25 oz or less than 5.00 oz. What range of
densities can a baseball be expected to have? Express this range
as a single number with an accompanying uncertainty limit.
81. The density of an irregularly shaped object was determined as
follows. The mass of the object was found to be 28.90 g  0.03 g.
A graduated cylinder was partially ﬁlled with water. The reading of
the level of the water was 6.4 cm3  0.1 cm3. The object was dropped
in the cylinder, and the level of the water rose to 9.8 cm3  0.1 cm3.
What is the density of the object with appropriate error limits? (See
Appendix 1.5.)

Challenge Problems
82. Draw a picture showing the markings (graduations) on glassware
that would allow you to make each of the following volume measurements of water and explain your answers (the numbers given
are as precise as possible).
a. 128.7 mL
b. 18 mL
c. 23.45 mL
If you made the measurements of three samples of water and then
poured all of the water together in one container, what total volume of water should you report? Support your answer.
83. Many times errors are expressed in terms of percentage. The percent error is the absolute value of the difference of the true value
and the experimental value, divided by the true value, and multiplied by 100.
Percent error 

0true value  experimental value 0
true value

 100

36

Chapter One Chemical Foundations

Calculate the percent error for the following measurements.
a. The density of an aluminum block determined in an experiment was 2.64 g/cm3. (True value 2.70 g/cm3.)
b. The experimental determination of iron in iron ore was 16.48%.
(True value 16.12%.)
c. A balance measured the mass of a 1.000-g standard as 0.9981 g.
84. A person weighed 15 pennies on a balance and recorded the following masses:

3.112 g
2.467 g
3.129 g
3.053 g
3.081 g

3.109 g
3.079 g
2.545 g
3.054 g
3.131 g

3.059 g
2.518 g
3.050 g
3.072 g
3.064 g

Curious about the results, he looked at the dates on each penny.
Two of the light pennies were minted in 1983 and one in 1982. The
dates on the 12 heavier pennies ranged from 1970 to 1982. Two
of the 12 heavier pennies were minted in 1982.
a. Do you think the Bureau of the Mint changed the way it made
pennies? Explain.
b. The person calculated the average mass of the 12 heavy pennies. He expressed this average as 3.0828 g  0.0482 g. What
is wrong with the numbers in this result, and how should the
value be expressed?
85. On October 21, 1982, the Bureau of the Mint changed the composition of pennies (see Exercise 84). Instead of an alloy of 95%
Cu and 5% Zn by mass, a core of 99.2% Zn and 0.8% Cu with a
thin shell of copper was adopted. The overall composition of the
new penny was 97.6% Zn and 2.4% Cu by mass. Does this account for the difference in mass among the pennies in Exercise
84? Assume the volume of the individual metals that make up
each penny can be added together to give the overall volume of
the penny, and assume each penny is the same size. (Density of
Cu  8.96 g/cm3; density of Zn  7.14 g/cm3.)
86. Ethylene glycol is the main component in automobile antifreeze.
To monitor the temperature of an auto cooling system, you intend
to use a meter that reads from 0 to 100. You devise a new temperature scale based on the approximate melting and boiling points
of a typical antifreeze solution (45C and 115C). You wish these
points to correspond to 0A and 100A, respectively.
a. Derive an expression for converting between A and C.
b. Derive an expression for converting between F and A.
c. At what temperature would your thermometer and a Celsius
thermometer give the same numerical reading?
d. Your thermometer reads 86A. What is the temperature in C
and in F?
e. What is a temperature of 45C in A?
87. Sterling silver is a solid solution of silver and copper. If a piece
of a sterling silver necklace has a mass of 105.0 g and a volume
of 10.12 mL, calculate the mass percent of copper in the piece of
necklace. Assume that the volume of silver present plus the volume of copper present equals the total volume. Refer to Table 1.5.
Mass percent of copper 

mass of copper
 100
total mass

88. Use molecular-level (microscopic) drawings for each of the following.
a. Show the differences between a gaseous mixture that is a homogeneous mixture of two different compounds, and a gaseous
mixture that is a homogeneous mixture of a compound and an
element.
b. Show the differences among a gaseous element, a liquid element, and a solid element.
89. Confronted with the box shown in the diagram, you wish to discover something about its internal workings. You have no tools
and cannot open the box. You pull on rope B, and it moves rather
freely. When you pull on rope A, rope C appears to be pulled
slightly into the box. When you pull on rope C, rope A almost
disappears into the box.*

A

B

C

a. Based on these observations, construct a model for the interior
mechanism of the box.
b. What further experiments could you do to reﬁne your model?
90. An experiment was performed in which an empty 100-mL graduated cylinder was weighed. It was weighed once again after it
had been ﬁlled to the 10.0-mL mark with dry sand. A 10-mL pipet
was used to transfer 10.00 mL of methanol to the cylinder. The
sand–methanol mixture was stirred until bubbles no longer
emerged from the mixture and the sand looked uniformly wet.
The cylinder was then weighed again. Use the data obtained from
this experiment (and displayed at the end of this problem) to ﬁnd
the density of the dry sand, the density of methanol, and the density of sand particles. Does the bubbling that occurs when the
methanol is added to the dry sand indicate that the sand and
methanol are reacting?
Mass of cylinder plus wet sand
Mass of cylinder plus dry sand
Mass of empty cylinder
Volume of dry sand
Volume of sand  methanol
Volume of methanol

45.2613 g
37.3488 g
22.8317 g
10.0 mL
17.6 mL
10.00 mL

*From Yoder, Suydam, and Snavely, Chemistry (New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1975), pp. 9–11.

Marathon Problem

37

Integrative Problems

Marathon Problem*

These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

91. The U.S. trade deﬁcit at the beginning of 2005 was $475,000,000.
If the wealthiest 1.00 percent of the U.S. population (297,000,000)
contributed an equal amount of money to bring the trade deﬁcit
to $0, how many dollars would each person contribute? If one of
these people were to pay their share in nickels only, how many
nickels are needed? Another person living abroad at the time decides
to pay in pounds sterling (£). How many pounds sterling does this
person contribute (assume a conversion rate of 1 £  $ 1.869)?
92. The density of osmium is reported by one source to be 22610
kg/m3. What is this density in g/cm3? What is the mass of a block
of osmium measuring 10.0 cm  8.0 cm  9.0 cm?
93. At the Amundsen-Scott South Pole base station in Antarctica,
when the temperature is 100.0F, researchers who live there can
join the “300 Club” by stepping into a sauna heated to 200.0F
then quickly running outside and around the pole that marks the
South Pole. What are these temperatures in C? What are these
temperatures in K? If you measured the temperatures only in C
and K, can you become a member of the “300 Club” (that is, is
there a 300.-degree difference between the temperature extremes
when measured in C and K?)

94. A cylindrical bar of gold that is 1.5 in high and 0.25 in in diameter has a mass of 23.1984 g, as determined on an analytical balance. An empty graduated cylinder is weighed on a triple-beam
balance and has a mass of 73.47 g. After pouring a small amount
of a liquid into the graduated cylinder, the mass is 79.16 g. When
the gold cylinder is placed in the graduated cylinder (the liquid
covers the top of the gold cylinder), the volume indicated on the
graduated cylinder is 8.5 mL. Assume that the temperature of the
gold bar and the liquid are 86F. If the density of the liquid decreases by 1.0% for each 10.C rise in temperature (over the range
0 to 50C), determine
a. the density of the gold at 86F.
b. the density of the liquid at 40.F.
Note: Parts a and b can be answered independently.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 68,
No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of Chemical
Education, Inc.

2 Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Contents
2.1 The Early History of
Chemistry
2.2 Fundamental Chemical Laws
2.3 Dalton’s Atomic Theory
2.4 Early Experiments to
Characterize the Atom
• The Electron
• Radioactivity
• The Nuclear Atom
2.5 The Modern View of Atomic
Structure: An Introduction
2.6 Molecules and Ions
2.7 An Introduction to the
Periodic Table
2.8 Naming Simple Compounds
• Binary Ionic Compounds
(Type I)
• Formulas from Names
• Binary Ionic Compounds
(Type II)
• Ionic Compounds with
Polyatomic Ions
• Binary Covalent Compounds
(Type III)
• Acids

A worker in Thailand piles up salt crystals.

38

W

here does one start in learning chemistry? Clearly we must consider some essential vocabulary and something about the origins of the science before we can proceed
very far. Thus, while Chapter 1 provided background on the fundamental ideas and procedures of science in general, Chapter 2 covers the speciﬁc chemical background necessary
for understanding the material in the next few chapters. The coverage of these topics is
necessarily brief at this point. We will develop these ideas more fully as it becomes
appropriate to do so. A major goal of this chapter is to present the systems for naming
chemical compounds to provide you with the vocabulary necessary to understand this book
and to pursue your laboratory studies.
Because chemistry is concerned ﬁrst and foremost with chemical changes, we will
proceed as quickly as possible to a study of chemical reactions (Chapters 3 and 4). However, before we can discuss reactions, we must consider some fundamental ideas about
atoms and how they combine.

2.1

The Early History of Chemistry

Chemistry has been important since ancient times. The processing of natural ores to
produce metals for ornaments and weapons and the use of embalming ﬂuids are just two
applications of chemical phenomena that were utilized prior to 1000 B.C.
The Greeks were the ﬁrst to try to explain why chemical changes occur. By about
400 B.C. they had proposed that all matter was composed of four fundamental substances:
ﬁre, earth, water, and air. The Greeks also considered the question of whether matter is
continuous, and thus inﬁnitely divisible into smaller pieces, or composed of small, indivisible particles. Supporters of the latter position were Demokritos* of Abdera (c. 460–c.
370 B.C.) and Leucippos, who used the term atomos (which later became atoms) to describe these ultimate particles. However, because the Greeks had no experiments to test
their ideas, no deﬁnitive conclusion could be reached about the divisibility of matter.
The next 2000 years of chemical history were dominated by a pseudoscience called
alchemy. Some alchemists were mystics and fakes who were obsessed with the idea of
turning cheap metals into gold. However, many alchemists were serious scientists, and
this period saw important advances: The alchemists discovered several elements and
learned to prepare the mineral acids.
The foundations of modern chemistry were laid in the sixteenth century with the development of systematic metallurgy (extraction of metals from ores) by a German, Georg Bauer
(1494–1555), and the medicinal application of minerals by a Swiss alchemist/physician known
as Paracelsus (full name: Philippus Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim [1493–1541]).
The ﬁrst “chemist” to perform truly quantitative experiments was Robert Boyle
(1627–1691), who carefully measured the relationship between the pressure and volume of
air. When Boyle published his book The Skeptical Chymist in 1661, the quantitative
sciences of physics and chemistry were born. In addition to his results on the quantitative
behavior of gases, Boyle’s other major contribution to chemistry consisted of his ideas
about the chemical elements. Boyle held no preconceived notion about the number of
elements. In his view, a substance was an element unless it could be broken down into
two or more simpler substances. As Boyle’s experimental deﬁnition of an element became
generally accepted, the list of known elements began to grow, and the Greek system of
*Democritus is an alternate spelling.

39

40

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

CHEMICAL IMPACT
There’s Gold in Them There Plants!
old has always held a strong allure. For example, the alchemists were obsessed with ﬁnding a way to transform
cheap metals into gold. Also, when gold was discovered in
California in 1849, a frantic rush occurred to that area
and other areas in the west. Although gold is still valuable,
most of the high-grade gold ores have been exhausted. This
leaves the low-grade ores—ores with low concentrations of
gold that are expensive to process relative to the amount of
gold ﬁnally obtained.
Now two scientists have come across a novel way to concentrate the gold from low-grade ores. Christopher Anderson
and Robert Brooks of Massey University in Palmerston North,
New Zealand, have found plants that accumulate gold atoms
as they grow in soil containing gold ore [Nature 395 (1998):
553]. The plants brassica (of the mustard family) and chicory
seem especially effective as botanical “gold miners.” When
these plants are dried and burned (after having grown in goldrich soil), the resulting ash contains approximately 150 ppm
(parts per million) of gold. (1 ppm gold represents 1 g of gold
in 106 g of sample.)
The New Zealand scientists were able to double the
amount of gold taken from the soil by the plants by treating

G

the soil with ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN). The thiocyanate, which reacts with the gold, making it more available to the plants, subsequently breaks down in the soil and
therefore poses no environmental hazard.
Thus plants seem to hold great promise as gold miners. They are efﬁcient and reliable and will never go on
strike.

This plant from the mustard family is a newly
discovered source of gold.

four elements ﬁnally died. Although Boyle was an excellent scientist, he was not always
right. For example, he clung to the alchemists’ views that metals were not true elements
and that a way would eventually be found to change one metal into another.
The phenomenon of combustion evoked intense interest in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The German chemist Georg Stahl (1660–1734) suggested that a substance
he called “phlogiston” ﬂowed out of the burning material. Stahl postulated that a substance
burning in a closed container eventually stopped burning because the air in the container
became saturated with phlogiston. Oxygen gas, discovered by Joseph Priestley (1733–1804),*
an English clergyman and scientist (Fig. 2.1), was found to support vigorous combustion
and was thus supposed to be low in phlogiston. In fact, oxygen was originally called
“dephlogisticated air.”
FIGURE 2.1
The Priestley Medal is the highest honor given by the American Chemical Society. It is named for Joseph
Priestley, who was born in England on March 13, 1733. He performed many important scientiﬁc experiments, among them the discovery that a gas later identiﬁed as carbon dioxide could be dissolved in water to
produce seltzer. Also, as a result of meeting Benjamin Franklin in London in 1766, Priestley became interested in electricity and was the ﬁrst to observe that graphite was an electrical conductor. However, his greatest discovery occurred in 1774 when he isolated oxygen by heating mercuric oxide.
Because of his nonconformist political views, Priestley was forced to leave England. He died in the
United States in 1804.

*Oxygen gas was actually ﬁrst observed by the Swedish chemist Karl W. Scheele (1742–1786), but because
his results were published after Priestley’s, the latter is commonly credited with the discovery of oxygen.

2.2 Fundamental Chemical Laws

2.2

Oxygen is from the French oxygène,
meaning “generator of acid,” because it
was initially considered to be an integral
part of all acids.

41

Fundamental Chemical Laws

By the late eighteenth century, combustion had been studied extensively; the gases carbon dioxide, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen had been discovered; and the list of elements
continued to grow. However, it was Antoine Lavoisier (1743–1794), a French chemist
(Fig. 2.2), who ﬁnally explained the true nature of combustion, thus clearing the way
for the tremendous progress that was made near the end of the eighteenth century.
Lavoisier, like Boyle, regarded measurement as the essential operation of chemistry. His
experiments, in which he carefully weighed the reactants and products of various reactions,
suggested that mass is neither created nor destroyed. Lavoisier’s veriﬁcation of this law of
conservation of mass was the basis for the developments in chemistry in the nineteenth
century.
Lavoisier’s quantitative experiments showed that combustion involved oxygen (which
Lavoisier named), not phlogiston. He also discovered that life was supported by a process
that also involved oxygen and was similar in many ways to combustion. In 1789 Lavoisier
published the ﬁrst modern chemistry textbook, Elementary Treatise on Chemistry, in which
he presented a uniﬁed picture of the chemical knowledge assembled up to that time.
Unfortunately, in the same year the text was published, the French Revolution broke out.
Lavoisier, who had been associated with collecting taxes for the government, was executed
on the guillotine as an enemy of the people in 1794.
After 1800, chemistry was dominated by scientists who, following Lavoisier’s lead,
performed careful weighing experiments to study the course of chemical reactions and to
determine the composition of various chemical compounds. One of these chemists, a
Frenchman, Joseph Proust (1754–1826), showed that a given compound always contains
exactly the same proportion of elements by mass. For example, Proust found that the substance copper carbonate is always 5.3 parts copper to 4 parts oxygen to 1 part carbon (by
mass). The principle of the constant composition of compounds, originally called “Proust’s
law,” is now known as the law of deﬁnite proportion.
Proust’s discovery stimulated John Dalton (1766–1844), an English schoolteacher
(Fig. 2.3), to think about atoms as the particles that might compose elements. Dalton
reasoned that if elements were composed of tiny individual particles, a given compound
should always contain the same combination of these atoms. This concept explained why
the same relative masses of elements were always found in a given compound.

42

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
But Dalton discovered another principle that convinced him even more of the existence of atoms. He noted, for example, that carbon and oxygen form two different
compounds that contain different relative amounts of carbon and oxygen, as shown by
the following data:
Mass of Oxygen That Combines
with 1 g of Carbon
Compound I

1.33 g

Compound II

2.66 g

Dalton noted that compound II contains twice as much oxygen per gram of carbon as compound I, a fact that could easily be explained in terms of atoms. Compound I might be CO,
and compound II might be CO2.* This principle, which was found to apply to compounds
of other elements as well, became known as the law of multiple proportions: When two
elements form a series of compounds, the ratios of the masses of the second element that
combine with 1 gram of the ﬁrst element can always be reduced to small whole numbers.
To make sure the signiﬁcance of this observation is clear, in Sample Exercise 2.1 we
will consider data for a series of compounds consisting of nitrogen and oxygen.
Sample Exercise 2.1

Illustrating the Law of Multiple Proportions
The following data were collected for several compounds of nitrogen and oxygen:
Mass of Nitrogen That Combines
with 1 g of Oxygen
Compound A

1.750 g

Compound B

0.8750 g

Compound C

0.4375 g

Show how these data illustrate the law of multiple proportions.
Solution
For the law of multiple proportions to hold, the ratios of the masses of nitrogen combining with 1 gram of oxygen in each pair of compounds should be small whole numbers.
We therefore compute the ratios as follows:
A
1.750
2


B
0.875
1
B
0.875
2


C
0.4375
1
A
1.750
4


C
0.4375
1
These results support the law of multiple proportions.
See Exercises 2.27 and 2.28.

*Subscripts are used to show the numbers of atoms present. The number 1 is understood (not written).
The symbols for the elements and the writing of chemical formulas will be illustrated further in Sections
2.6 and 2.7.

2.3 Dalton’s Atomic Theory

43

The signiﬁcance of the data in Sample Exercise 2.1 is that compound A contains twice
as much nitrogen (N) per gram of oxygen (O) as does compound B and that compound
B contains twice as much nitrogen per gram of oxygen as does compound C.
These data can be explained readily if the substances are composed of molecules
made up of nitrogen atoms and oxygen atoms. For example, one set of possibilities for
compounds A, B, and C is
A:

B:
N
O

N
O

2
1

=

C:
N
O

1
1

=

=

1
2

Now we can see that compound A contains two atoms of N for every atom of O, whereas
compound B contains one atom of N per atom of O. That is, compound A contains twice
as much nitrogen per given amount of oxygen as does compound B. Similarly, since compound B contains one N per O and compound C contains one N per two O’s, the nitrogen content of compound C per given amount of oxygen is half that of compound B.
Another set of compounds that ﬁts the data in Sample Exercise 2.1 is
A:

FIGURE 2.3
John Dalton (1766–1844), an Englishman,
began teaching at a Quaker school when he
was 12. His fascination with science included an intense interest in meteorology,
which led to an interest in the gases of the
air and their ultimate components, atoms.
Dalton is best known for his atomic theory, in which he postulated that the fundamental differences among atoms are their
masses. He was the ﬁrst to prepare a table
of relative atomic weights.
Dalton was a humble man with several
apparent handicaps: He was not articulate
and he was color-blind, a terrible problem
for a chemist. Despite these disadvantages,
he helped to revolutionize the science of
chemistry.

B:
N
O

N
O

1
1

=

C:

=

N
O

1
2

=

1
4

N
O

=

Verify for yourself that these compounds satisfy the requirements.
Still another set that works is
A:

B:

N
O

=

4
2

C:

N
O

=

2
2

2
4

See if you can come up with still another set of compounds that satisﬁes the data in Sample Exercise 2.1. How many more possibilities are there?
In fact, an inﬁnite number of other possibilities exists. Dalton could not deduce absolute formulas from the available data on relative masses. However, the data on the composition of compounds in terms of the relative masses of the elements supported his
hypothesis that each element consisted of a certain type of atom and that compounds were
formed from speciﬁc combinations of atoms.

2.3

Dalton’s Atomic Theory

In 1808 Dalton published A New System of Chemical Philosophy, in which he presented
his theory of atoms:
These statements are a modern
paraphrase of Dalton’s ideas.

1. Each element is made up of tiny particles called atoms.
2. The atoms of a given element are identical; the atoms of different elements are different
in some fundamental way or ways.
3. Chemical compounds are formed when atoms of different elements combine with each
other. A given compound always has the same relative numbers and types of atoms.
4. Chemical reactions involve reorganization of the atoms—changes in the way they are
bound together. The atoms themselves are not changed in a chemical reaction.

44

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

+
2 volumes hydrogen

FIGURE 2.4
A representation of some of Gay-Lussac’s
experimental results on combining gas
volumes.

Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac, a French physicist
and chemist, was remarkably versatile.
Although he is now known primarily for his
studies on the combining of volumes of
gases, Gay-Lussac was instrumental in the
studies of many of the other properties of
gases. Some of Gay-Lussac’s motivation to
learn about gases arose from his passion
for ballooning. In fact, he made ascents to
heights of over 4 miles to collect air samples, setting altitude records that stood for
about 50 years. Gay-Lussac also was the
codiscoverer of boron and the developer
of a process for manufacturing sulfuric
acid. As chief assayer of the French mint,
Gay-Lussac developed many techniques for
chemical analysis and invented many types
of glassware now used routinely in labs.
Gay-Lussac spent his last 20 years as a
lawmaker in the French government.

combines with 1 volume oxygen

to form

2 volumes gaseous water

to form

2 volumes hydrogen chloride

+
1 volume hydrogen

combines with 1 volume chlorine

It is instructive to consider Dalton’s reasoning on the relative masses of the atoms of
the various elements. In Dalton’s time water was known to be composed of the elements
hydrogen and oxygen, with 8 grams of oxygen present for every 1 gram of hydrogen. If
the formula for water were OH, an oxygen atom would have to have 8 times the mass of
a hydrogen atom. However, if the formula for water were H2O (two atoms of hydrogen
for every oxygen atom), this would mean that each atom of oxygen is 16 times as massive as each atom of hydrogen (since the ratio of the mass of one oxygen to that of two
hydrogens is 8 to 1). Because the formula for water was not then known, Dalton could
not specify the relative masses of oxygen and hydrogen unambiguously. To solve the problem, Dalton made a fundamental assumption: He decided that nature would be as simple
as possible. This assumption led him to conclude that the formula for water should be
OH. He thus assigned hydrogen a mass of 1 and oxygen a mass of 8.
Using similar reasoning for other compounds, Dalton prepared the ﬁrst table of atomic
masses (sometimes called atomic weights by chemists, since mass is often determined by
comparison to a standard mass—a process called weighing). Many of the masses were later
proved to be wrong because of Dalton’s incorrect assumptions about the formulas of certain compounds, but the construction of a table of masses was an important step forward.
Although not recognized as such for many years, the keys to determining absolute
formulas for compounds were provided in the experimental work of the French chemist
Joseph Gay-Lussac (1778–1850) and by the hypothesis of an Italian chemist named
Amadeo Avogadro (1776–1856). In 1809 Gay-Lussac performed experiments in which he
measured (under the same conditions of temperature and pressure) the volumes of gases
that reacted with each other. For example, Gay-Lussac found that 2 volumes of hydrogen
react with 1 volume of oxygen to form 2 volumes of gaseous water and that 1 volume of
hydrogen reacts with 1 volume of chlorine to form 2 volumes of hydrogen chloride. These
results are represented schematically in Fig. 2.4.
In 1811 Avogadro interpreted these results by proposing that at the same temperature
and pressure, equal volumes of different gases contain the same number of particles. This
assumption (called Avogadro’s hypothesis) makes sense if the distances between the particles in a gas are very great compared with the sizes of the particles. Under these conditions, the volume of a gas is determined by the number of molecules present, not by the
size of the individual particles.
If Avogadro’s hypothesis is correct, Gay-Lussac’s result,
2 volumes of hydrogen react with 1 volume of oxygen ¡ 2 volumes of water vapor
can be expressed as follows:
2 molecules* of hydrogen react with 1 molecule of oxygen ¡ 2 molecules of water
*A molecule is a collection of atoms (see Section 2.6).

2.4 Early Experiments to Characterize the Atom

H H

H H

FIGURE 2.5
A representation of combining gases at the
molecular level. The spheres represent
atoms in the molecules.

The Italian chemist Stanislao Cannizzaro
(1826–1910) cleared up the confusion in
1860 by doing a series of molar mass
determinations that convinced the scientiﬁc community that the correct atomic
mass of carbon is 12. For more information, see From Caveman to Chemist by
Hugh Salzberg (American Chemical
Society, 1991), p. 223.

H H

+

+

O

Cl

O

Cl

H

H

O

Cl

H

H

H

O

45

H

Cl

These observations can best be explained by assuming that gaseous hydrogen, oxygen,
and chlorine are all composed of diatomic (two-atom) molecules: H2, O2, and Cl2,
respectively. Gay-Lussac’s results can then be represented as shown in Fig. 2.5. (Note that
this reasoning suggests that the formula for water is H2O, not OH as Dalton believed.)
Unfortunately, Avogadro’s interpretations were not accepted by most chemists, and a
half-century of confusion followed, in which many different assumptions were made about
formulas and atomic masses.
During the nineteenth century, painstaking measurements were made of the masses
of various elements that combined to form compounds. From these experiments a list of
relative atomic masses could be determined. One of the chemists involved in contributing
to this list was a Swede named Jöns Jakob Berzelius (1779–1848), who discovered the
elements cerium, selenium, silicon, and thorium and developed the modern symbols for
the elements used in writing the formulas of compounds.

2.4

Early Experiments to Characterize the Atom

On the basis of the work of Dalton, Gay-Lussac, Avogadro, and others, chemistry was beginning to make sense. The concept of atoms was clearly a good idea. Inevitably, scientists began to wonder about the nature of the atom. What is an atom made of, and how
do the atoms of the various elements differ?

The Electron
The ﬁrst important experiments that led to an understanding of the composition of the
atom were done by the English physicist J. J. Thomson (Fig. 2.6), who studied electrical
discharges in partially evacuated tubes called cathode-ray tubes (Fig. 2.7) during the period from 1898 to 1903. Thomson found that when high voltage was applied to the tube,
a “ray” he called a cathode ray (because it emanated from the negative electrode, or cathode) was produced. Because this ray was produced at the negative electrode and was repelled by the negative pole of an applied electric ﬁeld (see Fig. 2.8), Thomson postulated
that the ray was a stream of negatively charged particles, now called electrons. From experiments in which he measured the deﬂection of the beam of electrons in a magnetic
ﬁeld, Thomson determined the charge-to-mass ratio of an electron:
e
 1.76  108 C/g
m
where e represents the charge on the electron in coulombs (C) and m represents the electron
mass in grams.

46

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Berzelius, Selenium, and Silicon
öns Jakob Berzelius was probably the best experimental
chemist of his generation and, given the crudeness of his
laboratory equipment, maybe the best of all time. Unlike
Lavoisier, who could afford to buy the best laboratory equipment available, Berzelius worked with minimal equipment
in very plain surroundings. One of
Comparison of Several of
Berzelius’s students
Berzelius’s Atomic Masses with
described the Swedthe Modern Values
ish chemist’s workAtomic Mass
place: “The laboratory consisted of
Berzelius’s
Current
two ordinary rooms
Element
Value
Value
with the very simplest
Chlorine
35.41
35.45
arrangements; there
Copper
63.00
63.55
were neither furnaces
Hydrogen
1.00
1.01
nor hoods, neither
Lead
207.12
207.2
water system nor gas.
Nitrogen
14.05
14.01
Against the walls
Oxygen
16.00
16.00
stood some closets
Potassium
39.19
39.10
with the chemicals, in
Silver
108.12
107.87
the middle the merSulfur
32.18
32.07
cury trough and the

J

Visualization: Cathode-Ray
Tube

blast lamp table. Beside this was the sink consisting of a stone
water holder with a stopcock and a pot standing under it. [Next
door in the kitchen] stood a small heating furnace.”
In these simple facilities Berzelius performed more than
2000 experiments over a 10-year period to determine accurate
atomic masses for the 50 elements then known. His success
can be seen from the data in the table at left. These remarkably
accurate values attest to his experimental skills and patience.
Besides his table of atomic masses, Berzelius made many
other major contributions to chemistry. The most important of
these was the invention of a simple set of symbols for the elements along with a system for writing the formulas of compounds to replace the awkward symbolic representations of
the alchemists. Although some chemists, including Dalton, objected to the new system, it was gradually adopted and forms
the basis of the system we use today.
In addition to these accomplishments, Berzelius discovered the elements cerium, thorium, selenium, and silicon. Of
these elements, selenium and silicon are particularly important in today’s world. Berzelius discovered selenium in 1817
in connection with his studies of sulfuric acid. For years selenium’s toxicity has been known, but only recently have we
become aware that it may have a positive effect on human

One of Thomson’s primary goals in his cathode-ray tube experiments was to gain an
understanding of the structure of the atom. He reasoned that since electrons could be produced from electrodes made of various types of metals, all atoms must contain electrons.
Since atoms were known to be electrically neutral, Thomson further assumed that atoms
also must contain some positive charge. Thomson postulated that an atom consisted of a

Source of electrical potential

Stream of negative
particles (electrons)
(–)
Metal
electrode

(+)
Partially
evacuated
glass tube

Metal
electrode

FIGURE 2.7
A cathode-ray tube. The fast-moving electrons excite the gas in the tube, causing a glow between the electrodes. The green color in
the photo is due to the response of the screen (coated with zinc sulﬁde) to the electron beam.

47

2.4 Early Experiments to Characterize the Atom

health. Studies have
shown that trace
amounts of selenium
in the diet may proSubstance
Alchemists’ Symbol tect people from
heart disease and
Silver
cancer. One study
based on data from
Lead
27 countries showed
an inverse relationTin
ship between the
cancer death rate and
Platinum
the selenium content
of soil in a particular
Sulfuric acid
region (low cancer
death rate in areas
Alcohol
with high selenium
content). Another
Sea salt
research paper reported an inverse
relationship between
the selenium content of the blood and the incidence of breast
cancer in women. A study reported in 1998 used the toenail
clippings of 33,737 men to show that selenium seems to protect against prostate cancer. Selenium is also found in the
heart muscle and may play an important role in proper heart
The Alchemists’ Symbols for
Some Common Elements
and Compounds

function. Because of these and other studies, selenium’s reputation has improved, and many scientists are now studying
its function in the human body.
Silicon is the second most abundant element in the earth’s
crust, exceeded only by oxygen. As we will see in Chapter
10, compounds involving silicon bonded to oxygen make up
most of the earth’s sand, rock, and soil. Berzelius prepared
silicon in its pure form in 1824 by heating silicon tetraﬂuoride (SiF4) with potassium metal. Today, silicon forms the basis for the modern microelectronics industry centered near San
Francisco in a place that has come to be known as “Silicon
Valley.” The technology of the silicon chip (see ﬁgure) with
its printed circuits
has transformed
computers from
room-sized monsters with thousands of unreliable
vacuum tubes to
desktop and notebook-sized units
with trouble-free
“solid-state”
A silicon chip.
circuitry.
See E. J. Holmyard, Alchemy (New York: Penguin Books, 1968).

diffuse cloud of positive charge with the negative electrons embedded randomly in it. This
model, shown in Fig. 2.9, is often called the plum pudding model because the electrons
are like raisins dispersed in a pudding (the positive charge cloud), as in plum pudding, a
favorite English dessert.
In 1909 Robert Millikan (1868–1953), working at the University of Chicago, performed very clever experiments involving charged oil drops. These experiments allowed

Spherical cloud of
positive charge
Applied
electrical field

(+)

Electrons

(–)
Metal
electrode

(+)
(–)

Metal
electrode

FIGURE 2.8
Deﬂection of cathode rays by an applied electric ﬁeld.

FIGURE 2.9
The plum pudding model of the atom.

48

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Oil spray

Visualization: Millikan’s Oil
Drop Experiment

Atomizer to
produce oil
droplets

(+)

X rays produce
charges on the
oil drops

Microscope

Electrically
charged plates

A technician using a scanner to monitor
the uptake of radioactive iodine in a
patient’s thyroid.

(–)

FIGURE 2.10
A schematic representation of the apparatus Millikan used to determine the charge on
the electron. The fall of charged oil droplets due to gravity can be halted by adjusting
the voltage across the two plates. This voltage and the mass of the oil drop can then be
used to calculate the charge on the oil drop. Millikan’s experiments showed that the
charge on an oil drop is always a whole-number multiple of the electron charge.

him to determine the magnitude of the electron charge (see Fig. 2.10). With this value and
the charge-to-mass ratio determined by Thomson, Millikan was able to calculate the mass
of the electron as 9.11  1031 kilogram.

Radioactivity
In the late nineteenth century scientists discovered that certain elements produce highenergy radiation. For example, in 1896 the French scientist Henri Becquerel found accidentally that a piece of a mineral containing uranium could produce its image on a
photographic plate in the absence of light. He attributed this phenomenon to a spontaneous emission of radiation by the uranium, which he called radioactivity. Studies in the
early twentieth century demonstrated three types of radioactive emission: gamma (␥) rays,
beta (␤) particles, and alpha (␣) particles. A ␥ ray is high-energy “light”; a ␤ particle is
a high-speed electron; and an ␣ particle has a 2 charge, that is, a charge twice that of
the electron and with the opposite sign. The mass of an ␣ particle is 7300 times that of
the electron. More modes of radioactivity are now known, and we will discuss them in
Chapter 18. Here we will consider only ␣ particles because they were used in some crucial
early experiments.
FIGURE 2.11
Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937) was born on
a farm in New Zealand. In 1895 he placed
second in a scholarship competition to attend Cambridge University but was awarded
the scholarship when the winner decided to
stay home and get married. As a scientist in
England, Rutherford did much of the early
work on characterizing radioactivity. He
named the ␣ and ␤ particles and the ␥ ray
and coined the term half-life to describe an
important attribute of radioactive elements.
His experiments on the behavior of ␣ particles striking thin metal foils led him to postulate the nuclear atom. He also invented
the name proton for the nucleus of the hydrogen atom. He received the Nobel Prize
in chemistry in 1908.

The Nuclear Atom
In 1911 Ernest Rutherford (Fig. 2.11), who performed many of the pioneering experiments to explore radioactivity, carried out an experiment to test Thomson’s plum pudding
model. The experiment involved directing ␣ particles at a thin sheet of metal foil, as illustrated in Fig. 2.12. Rutherford reasoned that if Thomson’s model were accurate, the
massive ␣ particles should crash through the thin foil like cannonballs through gauze, as
shown in Fig. 2.13(a). He expected the ␣ particles to travel through the foil with, at the
most, very minor deﬂections in their paths. The results of the experiment were very different from those Rutherford anticipated. Although most of the ␣ particles passed straight
through, many of the particles were deﬂected at large angles, as shown in Fig. 2.13(b),
and some were reﬂected, never hitting the detector. This outcome was a great surprise to
Rutherford. (He wrote that this result was comparable with shooting a howitzer at a piece
of paper and having the shell reﬂected back.)

2.5 The Modern View of Atomic Structure: An Introduction
Some α particles
are scattered
Source of
α particles

49

Most particles
pass straight
through foil

Beam of
α particles

FIGURE 2.12
Rutherford’s experiment on ␣-particle
bombardment of metal foil.

Screen to detect
scattered α particles

Thin
metal foil

Rutherford knew from these results that the plum pudding model for the atom could
not be correct. The large deﬂections of the ␣ particles could be caused only by a center
of concentrated positive charge that contains most of the atom’s mass, as illustrated in
Fig. 2.13(b). Most of the ␣ particles pass directly through the foil because the atom is
mostly open space. The deﬂected ␣ particles are those that had a “close encounter” with
the massive positive center of the atom, and the few reﬂected ␣ particles are those that
made a “direct hit” on the much more massive positive center.
In Rutherford’s mind these results could be explained only in terms of a nuclear
atom—an atom with a dense center of positive charge (the nucleus) with electrons moving
around the nucleus at a distance that is large relative to the nuclear radius.

2.5
The forces that bind the positively
charged protons in the nucleus will be
discussed in Chapter 18.

The Modern View of Atomic Structure:
An Introduction

In the years since Thomson and Rutherford, a great deal has been learned about atomic
structure. Because much of this material will be covered in detail in later chapters, only
an introduction will be given here. The simplest view of the atom is that it consists of a
tiny nucleus (with a diameter of about 1013 cm) and electrons that move about the nucleus at an average distance of about 108 cm from it (see Fig. 2.14).
As we will see later, the chemistry of an atom mainly results from its electrons. For
this reason, chemists can be satisﬁed with a relatively crude nuclear model. The nucleus
is assumed to contain protons, which have a positive charge equal in magnitude to the
electron’s negative charge, and neutrons, which have virtually the same mass as a proton but no charge. The masses and charges of the electron, proton, and neutron are shown
in Table 2.1.

Electrons scattered
throughout

Diffuse
positive
charge

–
–

–
–

–

–

–

–

Visualization: Gold Foil
Experiment

–
n+

–

–

–
–

–
–

–
(a)

–

–

–

FIGURE 2.13
(a) The expected results of the metal foil
experiment if Thomson’s model were correct. (b) Actual results.

–

(b)

50

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Nucleus

TABLE 2.1 The Mass and Charge of the Electron,
Proton, and Neutron
Particle

Mass

Charge*

Electron
Proton
Neutron

9.11  1031 kg
1.67  1027 kg
1.67  1027 kg

1
1
None

*The magnitude of the charge of the electron and the proton is
1.60  1019 C.

~10–13cm

~10–8cm

FIGURE 2.14
A nuclear atom viewed in cross section.
Note that this drawing is not to scale.

The chemistry of an atom arises from its
electrons.

Two striking things about the nucleus are its small size compared with the overall
size of the atom and its extremely high density. The tiny nucleus accounts for almost all
the atom’s mass. Its great density is dramatically demonstrated by the fact that a piece of
nuclear material about the size of a pea would have a mass of 250 million tons!
An important question to consider at this point is, “If all atoms are composed of these
same components, why do different atoms have different chemical properties?” The answer to this question lies in the number and the arrangement of the electrons. The electrons constitute most of the atomic volume and thus are the parts that “intermingle” when
atoms combine to form molecules. Therefore, the number of electrons possessed by a
given atom greatly affects its ability to interact with other atoms. As a result, the atoms
of different elements, which have different numbers of protons and electrons, show different chemical behavior.
A sodium atom has 11 protons in its nucleus. Since atoms have no net charge, the
number of electrons must equal the number of protons. Therefore, a sodium atom has 11
electrons moving around its nucleus. It is always true that a sodium atom has 11 protons
and 11 electrons. However, each sodium atom also has neutrons in its nucleus, and different types of sodium atoms exist that have different numbers of neutrons. For example,
consider the sodium atoms represented in Fig. 2.15. These two atoms are isotopes, or
atoms with the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons. Note that the
symbol for one particular type of sodium atom is written
Mass number ¡

If the atomic nucleus were the size of this
ball bearing, a typical atom would be the
size of this stadium.

→

Mass number 88n
A
Atomic number 8n Z X

Element
symbol

23
11Na

d Element symbol

Atomic number ¡

where the atomic number Z (number of protons) is written as a subscript, and the mass
number A (the total number of protons and neutrons) is written as a superscript. (The
particular atom represented here is called “sodium twenty-three.” It has 11 electrons, 11
protons, and 12 neutrons.) Because the chemistry of an atom is due to its electrons, isotopes show almost identical chemical properties. In nature most elements contain mixtures of isotopes.
Nucleus

Nucleus

11 protons
12 neutrons

FIGURE 2.15
Two isotopes of sodium. Both have 11 protons and 11 electrons, but they differ in the
number of neutrons in their nuclei.

11 protons
13 neutrons

11 electrons
23
11

Na

11 electrons
24
11

Na

2.5 The Modern View of Atomic Structure: An Introduction

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Reading the History of Bogs
cientists often “read” the history of the earth and its in- of airborne lead. This is conﬁrmed by the sharp decline in
habitants using very different “books” than traditional the ratio beginning 200 years ago that corresponds to the
historians. For example, the disappearance of the dinosaurs importation into England of Australian lead ores having low
65 million years ago in an “instant” of geological time was 206Pb 207Pb ratios.
So far only lead has been used to read the history in the
a great mystery until unusually high iridium and osmium
levels were discovered at a position in the earth’s crust cor- bog. However, Shotyk’s group is also measuring the changes
responding to that time. These high levels of iridium and in the levels of copper, zinc, cadmium, arsenic, mercury, and
osmium suggested that an extraterrestrial object had struck antimony. More interesting stories are sure to follow.
the earth 65 million years ago with catastrophic results
for the dinosaurs. Since then, the huge buried crater caused
by the object has been discovered on the Yucatan
Peninsula, and virtually everyone is now convinced
that this is the correct explanation for the disappearing dinosaurs.
History is also being “read” by scientists studying ice cores from glaciers in Iceland. Now Swiss scientists have found that ancient peat bogs can furnish
a reliable historical record. Geochemist William
Shotyk of the University of Bern has found a 15,000year window on history by analyzing the lead content of core samples from a Swiss mountainside peat
bog [Science 281 (1998): 1635]. Various parts of the
core samples were dated by 14C dating techniques
(see Chapter 18, Section 18.4, for more information)
and analyzed for their scandium and lead contents.
Also, the 206Pb 207Pb ratio was measured for each
sample. These data are represented in the accompanying ﬁgure. Notice that the 206Pb 207Pb ratio remains
very close to 1.20 (see the red band in the ﬁgure)
from 14,000 years to 3200 years. The value of 1.20
is the same as the average 206Pb 207Pb ratio in the
earth’s soil.
The core also reveals that the total lead and scandium levels increased simultaneously at the 6000year mark but that the 206Pb 207Pb ratio remained
close to 1.20. This coincides with the beginning of
agriculture in Europe, which caused more soil dust
to enter the atmosphere.
Signiﬁcantly, about 3000 years ago the 206Pb 207Pb
ratio decreased markedly. This also corresponds in
the core sample to an increase in total lead content
out of proportion to the increase in scandium. This
indicates the lead no longer resulted from soil dust
but from other activities of humans—lead mining had
Geochemist William Shotyk’s analysis of the lead content of ice core samples
begun. Since the 3000-year mark, the 206Pb 207Pb ra- reveals a 15,000-year history of lead levels. (Note: Dates are based on calitio has remained well below 1.20, indicating that hu- brated radiocarbon dating. Because the core was retrieved in two segments, a
man use of lead ores has become the dominant source break in data occurs between 2060 and 3200 years before present.)

S

51

52

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Sample Exercise 2.2

Writing the Symbols for Atoms
Write the symbol for the atom that has an atomic number of 9 and a mass number of 19.
How many electrons and how many neutrons does this atom have?
Solution
The atomic number 9 means the atom has 9 protons. This element is called ﬂuorine,
symbolized by F. The atom is represented as
19
9F

and is called “ﬂuorine nineteen.” Since the atom has 9 protons, it also must have 9 electrons to achieve electrical neutrality. The mass number gives the total number of protons
and neutrons, which means that this atom has 10 neutrons.
See Exercises 2.43 through 2.46.

2.6

Visualization: Covalent
Bonding

Molecules and Ions

From a chemist’s viewpoint, the most interesting characteristic of an atom is its ability
to combine with other atoms to form compounds. It was John Dalton who ﬁrst recognized that chemical compounds are collections of atoms, but he could not determine
the structure of atoms or their means for binding to each other. During the twentieth
century we learned that atoms have electrons and that these electrons participate in
bonding one atom to another. We will discuss bonding thoroughly in Chapters 8 and 9;
here we will introduce some simple bonding ideas that will be useful in the next few
chapters.
The forces that hold atoms together in compounds are called chemical bonds. One
way that atoms can form bonds is by sharing electrons. These bonds are called covalent
bonds, and the resulting collection of atoms is called a molecule. Molecules can be represented in several different ways. The simplest method is the chemical formula, in which
the symbols for the elements are used to indicate the types of atoms present and subscripts
are used to indicate the relative numbers of atoms. For example, the formula for carbon
dioxide is CO2, meaning that each molecule contains 1 atom of carbon and 2 atoms of
oxygen.
Examples of molecules that contain covalent bonds are hydrogen (H2), water (H2O),
oxygen (O2), ammonia (NH3), and methane (CH4). More information about a molecule is
given by its structural formula, in which the individual bonds are shown (indicated by
lines). Structural formulas may or may not indicate the actual shape of the molecule. For
example, water might be represented as
H O

H

O

or

H
N
H H H
Ammonia

H

The structure on the right shows the actual shape of the water molecule. Scientists know
from experimental evidence that the molecule looks like this. (We will study the shapes
of molecules further in Chapter 8.) The structural formula for ammonia is shown in the
margin at left.
Note that atoms connected to the central atom by dashed lines are behind the plane
of the paper, and atoms connected to the central atom by wedges are in front of the plane
of the paper.
In a compound composed of molecules, the individual molecules move around as
independent units. For example, a molecule of methane gas can be represented in several
ways. The structural formula for methane (CH4) is shown in Fig. 2.16. The space-ﬁlling

2.6 Molecules and Ions

53

H
C
H H H
Methane

FIGURE 2.16
The structural formula for methane.

FIGURE 2.17
Space-ﬁlling model of methane. This type
of model shows both the relative sizes of
the atoms in the molecule and their
spatial relationships.

FIGURE 2.18
Ball-and-stick model of methane.

model of methane, which shows the relative sizes of the atoms as well as their relative
orientation in the molecule, is given in Fig. 2.17. Ball-and-stick models are also used to
represent molecules. The ball-and-stick structure of methane is shown in Fig. 2.18.
A second type of chemical bond results from attractions among ions. An ion is an
atom or group of atoms that has a net positive or negative charge. The best-known ionic
compound is common table salt, or sodium chloride, which forms when neutral chlorine
and sodium react.
To see how the ions are formed, consider what happens when an electron is
transferred from a sodium atom to a chlorine atom (the neutrons in the nuclei will be
ignored):
Neutral sodium
atom (Na)
Sodium ion
(Na+)

11+

Minus 1 electron

11+

10 electrons
11 electrons

Na is usually called the sodium ion
rather than the sodium cation. Also Cl
is called the chloride ion rather than the
chloride anion. In general, when a speciﬁc ion is referred to, the word ion
rather than cation or anion is used.

With one electron stripped off, the sodium, with its 11 protons and only 10 electrons,
now has a net 1 charge—it has become a positive ion. A positive ion is called a
cation. The sodium ion is written as Na, and the process can be represented in shorthand form as
Na ¡ Na  e

54

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
If an electron is added to chlorine,

Chloride ion
(Cl–)

Neutral chlorine
atom (Cl)

17+

17+

Plus 1 electron

17 electrons
18 electrons

the 18 electrons produce a net 1 charge; the chlorine has become an ion with a negative charge—an anion. The chloride ion is written as Cl, and the process is represented as
Cl  e ¡ Cl
Because anions and cations have opposite charges, they attract each other. This force
of attraction between oppositely charged ions is called ionic bonding. As illustrated in
Fig. 2.19, sodium metal and chlorine gas (a green gas composed of Cl2 molecules) react

Cl–

Na+

Cl–

Na+

Na
Na

Cl Cl

FIGURE 2.19
Sodium metal (which is so soft it can be cut with a knife and which consists of individual sodium atoms) reacts with chlorine gas (which
contains Cl2 molecules) to form solid sodium chloride (which contains Na and Cl ions packed together).

2.7 An Introduction to the Periodic Table

55

to form solid sodium chloride, which contains many Na and Cl ions packed together
and forms the beautiful colorless cubic crystals shown in Fig. 2.19.
A solid consisting of oppositely charged ions is called an ionic solid, or a salt.
Ionic solids can consist of simple ions, as in sodium chloride, or of polyatomic
(many atom) ions, as in ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3), which contains ammonium ions
(NH4) and nitrate ions (NO3). The ball-and-stick models of these ions are shown in
Fig. 2.20.
FIGURE 2.20
Ball-and-stick models of the ammonium ion
(NH4) and the nitrate ion (NO3).

Visualization: Comparison of a
Molecular Compound and an
Ionic Compound

Metals tend to form positive ions; nonmetals tend to form negative ions.

Elements in the same vertical column in
the periodic table form a group (or family)
and generally have similar properties.

Samples of chlorine gas, liquid bromine,
and solid iodine.

2.7

An Introduction to the Periodic Table

In a room where chemistry is taught or practiced, a chart called the periodic table is
almost certain to be found hanging on the wall. This chart shows all the known elements
and gives a good deal of information about each. As our study of chemistry progresses,
the usefulness of the periodic table will become more obvious. This section will simply
introduce it to you.
A simpliﬁed version of the periodic table is shown in Fig. 2.21. The letters in the
boxes are the symbols for the elements; these abbreviations are based on the current
element names or the original names (see Table 2.2). The number shown above
each symbol is the atomic number (number of protons) for that element. For example,
carbon (C) has atomic number 6, and lead (Pb) has atomic number 82. Most of the
elements are metals. Metals have characteristic physical properties such as efﬁcient
conduction of heat and electricity, malleability (they can be hammered into thin sheets),
ductility (they can be pulled into wires), and (often) a lustrous appearance. Chemically, metals tend to lose electrons to form positive ions. For example, copper is a
typical metal. It is lustrous (although it tarnishes readily); it is an excellent conductor
of electricity (it is widely used in electrical wires); and it is readily formed into various shapes, such as pipes for water systems. Copper is also found in many salts, such
as the beautiful blue copper sulfate, in which copper is present as Cu2 ions. Copper
is a member of the transition metals—the metals shown in the center of the periodic
table.
The relatively few nonmetals appear in the upper-right corner of the table (to the
right of the heavy line in Fig. 2.21), except hydrogen, a nonmetal that resides in the upperleft corner. The nonmetals lack the physical properties that characterize the metals.
Chemically, they tend to gain electrons in reactions with metals to form negative ions.
Nonmetals often bond to each other by forming covalent bonds. For example, chlorine is
a typical nonmetal. Under normal conditions it exists as Cl2 molecules; it reacts with
metals to form salts containing Cl ions (NaCl, for example); and it forms covalent bonds
with nonmetals (for example, hydrogen chloride gas, HCl).
The periodic table is arranged so that elements in the same vertical columns (called
groups or families) have similar chemical properties. For example, all of the alkali
metals, members of Group 1A—lithium (Li), sodium (Na), potassium (K), rubidium (Rb),
cesium (Cs), and francium (Fr)—are very active elements that readily form ions with a
1 charge when they react with nonmetals. The members of Group 2A—beryllium (Be),
magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr), barium (Ba), and radium (Ra)—are called
the alkaline earth metals. They all form ions with a 2 charge when they react with
nonmetals. The halogens, the members of Group 7A—ﬂuorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine
(Br), iodine (I), and astatine (At)—all form diatomic molecules. Fluorine, chlorine,
bromine, and iodine all react with metals to form salts containing ions with a 1 charge
(F, Cl, Br, and I). The members of Group 8A—helium (He), neon (Ne), argon (Ar),
krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), and radon (Rn)—are known as the noble gases. They all exist
under normal conditions as monatomic (single-atom) gases and have little chemical
reactivity.

56

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Noble
gases

Alkaline
1 earth metals

Halogens 18

1A

1

Alkali metals

H

8A

2

13

14

15

16

17

2A

3A

4A

5A

6A

7A

2

He

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

Ne

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

3

4

5

6

7
8
Transition metals

9

10

11

12

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

K

Ca

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

Rb

Sr

Y

Zr

Nb

Mo

Tc

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

55

56

57

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

Cs

Ba

La*

Hf

Ta

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au

Hg

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

87

88

89

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

Fr

Ra

Ac†

Rf

Db

Sg

Bh

Hs

Mt

Ds

Rg

Uub

Uut

Uuq

Uup

*Lanthanides

†

Actinides

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

Ce

Pr

Nd

Pm

Sm

Eu

Gd

Tb

Dy

Ho

Er

Tm

Yb

Lu

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

Th

Pa

U

Np

Pu

Am

Cm

Bk

Cf

Es

Fm

Md

No

Lr

FIGURE 2.21
The periodic table.

TABLE 2.2 The Symbols for the Elements That Are
Based on the Original Names
Current Name
Antimony
Copper
Iron
Lead
Mercury
Potassium
Silver
Sodium
Tin
Tungsten

Original Name

Symbol

Stibium
Cuprum
Ferrum
Plumbum
Hydrargyrum
Kalium
Argentum
Natrium
Stannum
Wolfram

Sb
Cu
Fe
Pb
Hg
K
Ag
Na
Sn
W

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

57

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Hassium Fits Right in
assium, element 108, does not exist in nature but must
be made in a particle accelerator. It was ﬁrst created in
26
1984 and can be made by shooting magnesium-26 (12
Mg)
248
atoms at curium-248 ( 96Cm) atoms. The collisions between
265
these atoms produce some hassium-265 (108
Hs) atoms. The
position of hassium in the periodic table (see Fig. 2.21) in
the vertical column containing iron, ruthenium, and osmium
suggests that hassium should have chemical properties similar to these metals. However, it is not easy to test this prediction—only a few atoms of hassium can be made at a given
time and they last for only about 9 seconds. Imagine having
to get your next lab experiment done in 9 seconds!
Amazingly, a team of chemists from the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory in California, the Paul Scherrer

H

Another format of the periodic table will
be discussed in Section 7.11.

Institute and the University of Bern in Switzerland, and the
Institute of Nuclear Chemistry in Germany have done
experiments to characterize the chemical behavior of hassium.
For example, they have observed that hassium atoms react
with oxygen to form a hassium oxide compound of the type
expected from its position on the periodic table. The team
has also measured other properties of hassium, including the
energy released as it undergoes nuclear decay to another
atom.
This work would have surely pleased Dmitri Mendeleev
(see Fig. 7.23), who originally developed the periodic table
and showed its power to predict chemical properties.

Note from Fig. 2.21 that alternate sets of symbols are used to denote the groups. The
symbols 1A through 8A are the traditional designations, whereas the numbers 1 to 18
have been suggested recently. In this text the 1A to 8A designations will be used.
The horizontal rows of elements in the periodic table are called periods. Horizontal
row 1 is called the ﬁrst period (it contains H and He); row 2 is called the second period
(elements Li through Ne); and so on.
We will learn much more about the periodic table as we continue with our study of
chemistry. Meanwhile, when an element is introduced in this text, you should always note
its position on the periodic table.

2.8

Naming Simple Compounds

When chemistry was an infant science, there was no system for naming compounds.
Names such as sugar of lead, blue vitrol, quicklime, Epsom salts, milk of magnesia,
gypsum, and laughing gas were coined by early chemists. Such names are called common names. As chemistry grew, it became clear that using common names for
compounds would lead to unacceptable chaos. Nearly 5 million chemical compounds
are currently known. Memorizing common names for these compounds would be an
impossible task.
The solution, of course, is to adopt a system for naming compounds in which the
name tells something about the composition of the compound. After learning the system,
a chemist given a formula should be able to name the compound or, given a name, should
be able to construct the compound’s formula. In this section we will specify the most important rules for naming compounds other than organic compounds (those based on chains
of carbon atoms).
We will begin with the systems for naming inorganic binary compounds—
compounds composed of two elements—which we classify into various types for easier
recognition. We will consider both ionic and covalent compounds.

58

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

TABLE 2.3

Common Monatomic Cations and Anions

Cation

Name



H
Li
Na
K
Cs
Be2
Mg2
Ca2
Ba2
Al3
Ag

Anion

Hydrogen
Lithium
Sodium
Potassium
Cesium
Beryllium
Magnesium
Calcium
Barium
Aluminum
Silver



H
F
Cl
Br
I
O2
S2
N3
P3

Name
Hydride
Fluoride
Chloride
Bromide
Iodide
Oxide
Sulﬁde
Nitride
Phosphide

Binary Ionic Compounds (Type I)
Binary ionic compounds contain a positive ion (cation) always written ﬁrst in the formula and a negative ion (anion). In naming these compounds, the following rules apply:
1. The cation is always named ﬁrst and the anion second.
A monatomic cation has the same name
as its parent element.

2. A monatomic (meaning “one-atom”) cation takes its name from the name of the
element. For example, Na is called sodium in the names of compounds containing
this ion.
3. A monatomic anion is named by taking the root of the element name and adding -ide.
Thus the Cl ion is called chloride.
Some common monatomic cations and anions and their names are given in Table 2.3.
The rules for naming binary ionic compounds are illustrated by the following
examples:

In formulas of ionic compounds, simple
ions are represented by the element
symbol: Cl means Cl, Na means Na,
and so on.

Sample Exercise 2.3

Compound

Ions Present

Name

NaCl
KI
CaS
Li3N
CsBr
MgO

Na, Cl
K, I
Ca2, S2
Li, N3
Cs, Br
Mg2, O2

Sodium chloride
Potassium iodide
Calcium sulﬁde
Lithium nitride
Cesium bromide
Magnesium oxide

Naming Type I Binary Compounds
Name each binary compound.
a. CsF

b. AlCl3

c. LiH

Solution
a. CsF is cesium ﬂuoride.
b. AlCl3 is aluminum chloride.
c. LiH is lithium hydride.
Notice that, in each case, the cation is named ﬁrst, and then the anion is named.
See Exercise 2.55.

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

Visualization: Formation of
Ionic Compounds

TABLE 2.4
Cations
Ion
Fe3
Fe2
Cu2
Cu
Co3
Co2
Sn4
Sn2
Pb4
Pb2
Hg2
Hg22*
Ag
Zn2
Cd2

Common Type II

59

Formulas from Names
So far we have started with the chemical formula of a compound and decided on its
systematic name. The reverse process is also important. For example, given the name
calcium hydroxide, we can write the formula as Ca(OH)2 because we know that calcium
forms only Ca2 ions and that, since hydroxide is OH, two of these anions will be required
to give a neutral compound.

Systematic Name
Iron(III)
Iron(II)
Copper(II)
Copper(I)
Cobalt(III)
Cobalt(II)
Tin(IV)
Tin(II)
Lead(IV)
Lead(II)
Mercury(II)
Mercury(I)
Silver†
Zinc†
Cadmium†

*Note that mercury(I) ions always occur
bound together to form Hg22 ions.
†Although these are transition metals, they
form only one type of ion, and a Roman
numeral is not used.

Sample Exercise 2.4

Binary Ionic Compounds (Type II)
In the binary ionic compounds considered earlier (Type I), the metal present forms only
a single type of cation. That is, sodium forms only Na, calcium forms only Ca2, and
so on. However, as we will see in more detail later in the text, there are many metals that
form more than one type of positive ion and thus form more than one type of ionic compound with a given anion. For example, the compound FeCl2 contains Fe2 ions, and the
compound FeCl3 contains Fe3 ions. In a case such as this, the charge on the metal ion
must be speciﬁed. The systematic names for these two iron compounds are iron(II) chloride and iron(III) chloride, respectively, where the Roman numeral indicates the charge
of the cation.
Another system for naming these ionic compounds that is seen in the older literature
was used for metals that form only two ions. The ion with the higher charge has a name
ending in -ic, and the one with the lower charge has a name ending in -ous. In this system,
for example, Fe3 is called the ferric ion, and Fe2 is called the ferrous ion. The names
for FeCl3 and FeCl2 are then ferric chloride and ferrous chloride, respectively. In this text
we will use the system that employs Roman numerals. Table 2.4 lists the systematic names
for many common type II cations.

Formulas from Names for Type I Binary Compounds
Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. potassium iodide
b. calcium oxide
c. gallium bromide
Solution
Name

Formula

Comments

a. potassium iodide
b. calcium oxide
c. gallium bromide

KI
CaO
GaBr3

Contains K and I.
Contains Ca2 and O2.
Contains Ga3 and Br.
Must have 3Br to balance charge of Ga3.
See Exercise 2.55.

Sample Exercise 2.5

Naming Type II Binary Compounds
1. Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a. CuCl

b. HgO

c. Fe2O3

2. Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Manganese(IV) oxide
b. Lead(II) chloride

60

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Type II binary ionic compounds contain a
metal that can form more than one type
of cation.
A compound must be electrically neutral.

Solution
All of these compounds include a metal that can form more than one type of cation. Thus
we must ﬁrst determine the charge on each cation. This can be done by recognizing that
a compound must be electrically neutral; that is, the positive and negative charges must
exactly balance.
1.
Formula

Name

Comments

a. CuCl

Copper(I) chloride

b. HgO

Mercury(II) oxide

c. Fe2O3

Iron(III) oxide

Because the anion is Cl, the cation must be Cu
(for charge balance), which requires a Roman
numeral I.
Because the anion is O 2–, the cation must be Hg 2
[mercury(II)].
The three O2– ions carry a total charge of 6, so
two Fe3 ions [iron(III)] are needed to give a 6
charge.

2.
Name

Formula

Comments

a. Manganese(IV) oxide

MnO2

b. Lead(II) chloride

PbCl2

Two O2– ions (total charge 4)
are required by the Mn4 ion [manganese(IV)].
Two Cl ions are required by the Pb2 ion
[lead(II)] for charge balance.
See Exercise 2.56.

A compound containing a transition metal
usually requires a Roman numeral in its
name.

Crystals of copper(Il) sulfate.

Sample Exercise 2.6

Note that the use of a Roman numeral in a systematic name is required only in cases
where more than one ionic compound forms between a given pair of elements. This case
most commonly occurs for compounds containing transition metals, which often form
more than one cation. Elements that form only one cation do not need to be identiﬁed by
a Roman numeral. Common metals that do not require Roman numerals are the Group
1A elements, which form only 1 ions; the Group 2A elements, which form only 2
ions; and aluminum, which forms only Al3. The element silver deserves special mention
at this point. In virtually all its compounds silver is found as the Ag ion. Therefore,
although silver is a transition metal (and can potentially form ions other than Ag), silver compounds are usually named without a Roman numeral. Thus AgCl is typically called
silver chloride rather than silver(I) chloride, although the latter name is technically correct. Also, a Roman numeral is not used for zinc compounds, since zinc forms only the
Zn2 ion.
As shown in Sample Exercise 2.5, when a metal ion is present that forms more than
one type of cation, the charge on the metal ion must be determined by balancing the positive and negative charges of the compound. To do this you must be able to recognize the
common cations and anions and know their charges (see Tables 2.3 and 2.5).

Naming Binary Compounds
1. Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a. CoBr2

b. CaCl2

c. Al2O3

2. Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Chromium(III) chloride
b. Gallium iodide

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

61

Solution
1.
Formula

Name

Comments

a. CoBr2

Cobalt(II) bromide

b. CaCl2

Calcium chloride

c. Al2O3

Aluminum oxide

Cobalt is a transition metal; the compound name
must have a Roman numeral. The two Br ions
must be balanced by a Co2 ion.
Calcium, an alkaline earth metal, forms only the
Ca2 ion. A Roman numeral is not necessary.
Aluminum forms only the Al3 ion. A Roman
numeral is not necessary.

2.
Name

Formula

Comments

a. Chromium(III) chloride

CrCl3

b. Gallium iodide

GaI3

Chromium(III) indicates that Cr 3 is present,
so 3 Cl ions are needed for charge balance.
Gallium always forms 3 ions, so 3 I ions
are required for charge balance.
See Exercises 2.57 and 2.58.

The following ﬂowchart is useful when you are naming binary ionic compounds:
Does the compound contain
Type I or Type II cations?

Type I

Name the cation using
the element name.

Various chromium compounds dissolved in
water. From left to right: CrCl2, K2Cr2O7,
Cr(NO3)3, CrCl3, K2CrO4.

Type II

Using the principle of charge
balance, determine the cation charge.

Include in the cation name a Roman
numeral indicating the charge.

The common Type I and Type II ions are summarized in Fig. 2.22. Also shown in Fig. 2.22
are the common monatomic ions.
1A

8A
2A

Li

3A

5A

6A

7A

3–

2–

F–

–

Cl–

N
Al3+

Na+ Mg2+
K+ Ca2+

Cr2+ Mn2+ Fe2+ Co2+
Cr3+ Mn3+ Fe3+ Co3+

Rb+ Sr2+
Cs+ Ba2+

FIGURE 2.22
The common cations and anions.

4A

+

Common Type I cations

S2

Cu+ Zn2+
Cu2+
Ag+ Cd2+
Hg22+
Hg2+

Common Type II cations

O

Br–
Sn2+
Sn4+
Pb2+
Pb4+

I–

Common monatomic anions

62

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

TABLE 2.5

Common Polyatomic Ions

Ion

Name
2

Hg2
NH4
NO2
NO3
SO32
SO42
HSO4
OH
CN
PO43
HPO42
H2PO4

Mercury(I)
Ammonium
Nitrite
Nitrate
Sulﬁte
Sulfate
Hydrogen sulfate
(bisulfate is a widely
used common name)
Hydroxide
Cyanide
Phosphate
Hydrogen phosphate
Dihydrogen phosphate

Ion


NCS
CO32
HCO3
ClO
ClO2
ClO3
ClO4
C2H3O2
MnO4
Cr2O72
CrO42
O22
C2O42

Name
Thiocyanate
Carbonate
Hydrogen carbonate
(bicarbonate is a widely
used common name)
Hypochlorite
Chlorite
Chlorate
Perchlorate
Acetate
Permanganate
Dichromate
Chromate
Peroxide
Oxalate

Ionic Compounds with Polyatomic Ions

Polyatomic ion formulas must be
memorized.

Sample Exercise 2.7

We have not yet considered ionic compounds that contain polyatomic ions. For example,
the compound ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3, contains the polyatomic ions NH4 and NO3.
Polyatomic ions are assigned special names that must be memorized to name the compounds containing them. The most important polyatomic ions and their names are listed
in Table 2.5.
Note in Table 2.5 that several series of anions contain an atom of a given element and different numbers of oxygen atoms. These anions are called oxyanions.
When there are two members in such a series, the name of the one with the smaller
number of oxygen atoms ends in -ite and the name of the one with the larger number
ends in -ate—for example, sulﬁte (SO32) and sulfate (SO42). When more than two
oxyanions make up a series, hypo- (less than) and per- (more than) are used as preﬁxes to name the members of the series with the fewest and the most oxygen atoms,
respectively. The best example involves the oxyanions containing chlorine, as shown
in Table 2.5.

Naming Compounds Containing Polyatomic Ions
1. Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a. Na2SO4
b. KH2PO4
c. Fe(NO3)3
d. Mn(OH)2
e. Na2SO3
f. Na2CO3
2. Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Sodium hydrogen carbonate
b. Cesium perchlorate

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

63

c. Sodium hypochlorite
d. Sodium selenate
e. Potassium bromate
Solution
1.
Formula

Name

Comments

a. Na2SO4
b. KH2PO4
c. Fe(NO3)3

Sodium sulfate
Potassium dihydrogen
phosphate
Iron(III) nitrate

d. Mn(OH)2

Manganese(II) hydroxide

e. Na2SO3
f. Na2CO3

Sodium sulﬁte
Sodium carbonate

Transition metal—name must contain
a Roman numeral. The Fe3 ion
balances three NO3 ions.
Transition metal—name must contain
a Roman numeral. The Mn2 ion
balances three OH ions.

2.
Name

Formula

Comments

a. Sodium hydrogen
carbonate
b. Cesium perchlorate
c. Sodium hypochlorite
d. Sodium selenate

NaHCO3

Often called sodium bicarbonate.

CsClO4
NaOCl
Na2SeO4

e. Potassium bromate

KBrO3

Atoms in the same group, like sulfur and
selenium, often form similar ions that are
named similarly. Thus SeO42– is selenate,
like SO42– (sulfate).
As above, BrO3 is bromate, like ClO3
(chlorate).
See Exercises 2.59 and 2.60.

Binary Covalent Compounds (Type III)
In binary covalent compounds, the
element names follow the same rules as
for binary ionic compounds.

Binary covalent compounds are formed between two nonmetals. Although these
compounds do not contain ions, they are named very similarly to binary ionic
compounds.
In the naming of binary covalent compounds, the following rules apply:
1. The ﬁrst element in the formula is named ﬁrst, using the full element name.
2. The second element is named as if it were an anion.
3. Preﬁxes are used to denote the numbers of atoms present. These preﬁxes are given in
Table 2.6.
4. The preﬁx mono- is never used for naming the ﬁrst element. For example, CO is called
carbon monoxide, not monocarbon monoxide.

64

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

TABLE 2.6 Preﬁxes Used to
Indicate Number in Chemical
Names
Preﬁx

Number Indicated

monoditritetrapentahexaheptaoctanonadeca-

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Sample Exercise 2.8

To see how these rules apply, we will now consider the names of the several covalent compounds formed by nitrogen and oxygen:
Compound

Systematic Name

Common Name

N2O
NO
NO2
N2O3
N2O4
N2O5

Dinitrogen monoxide
Nitrogen monoxide
Nitrogen dioxide
Dinitrogen trioxide
Dinitrogen tetroxide
Dinitrogen pentoxide

Nitrous oxide
Nitric oxide

Notice from the preceding examples that to avoid awkward pronunciations, we often
drop the ﬁnal o or a of the preﬁx when the element begins with a vowel. For example,
N2O4 is called dinitrogen tetroxide, not dinitrogen tetraoxide, and CO is called carbon
monoxide, not carbon monooxide.
Some compounds are always referred to by their common names. The two best
examples are water and ammonia. The systematic names for H2O and NH3 are never
used.

Naming Type III Binary Compounds
1. Name each of the following compounds:
a. PCl5
b. PCl3
c. SO2
2. From the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a. Sulfur hexaﬂuoride
b. Sulfur trioxide
c. Carbon dioxide
Solution
1.
Formula

Name

a. PCl5
b. PCl3
c. SO2

Phosphorus pentachloride
Phosphorus trichloride
Sulfur dioxide

2.
Name

Formula

a. Sulfur hexaﬂuoride
b. Sulfur trioxide
c. Carbon dioxide

SF6
SO3
CO2
See Exercises 2.61 and 2.62.

The rules for naming binary compounds are summarized in Fig. 2.23. Preﬁxes
to indicate the number of atoms are used only in Type III binary compounds (those
containing two nonmetals). An overall strategy for naming compounds is given in
Fig. 2.24.

2.8 Naming Simple Compounds

Binary compound?

Yes

Metal present?

No

Yes

Type III:
Use prefixes.

Does the metal form
more than one cation?

No

Yes

Type I:
Use the element
name for the cation.

Type II:
Determine the charge of the cation;
use a Roman numeral after the
element name for the cation.

FIGURE 2.23
A ﬂowchart for naming binary compounds.

Sample Exercise 2.9

Naming Various Types of Compounds
1. Give the systematic name for each of the following compounds:
a.
b.
c.
d.

P4O10
Nb2O5
Li2O2
Ti(NO3)4

2. Given the following systematic names, write the formula for each compound:
a.
b.
c.
d.

Vanadium(V) ﬂuoride
Dioxygen diﬂuoride
Rubidium peroxide
Gallium oxide

Binary compound?

No

Polyatomic ion
or ions present?

No

FIGURE 2.24
Overall strategy for naming chemical
compounds.

This is a compound for which
naming procedures have not
yet been considered.

Yes

Use the strategy
summarized in Figure 2.23.

Yes

Name the compound using
procedures similar to those for
naming binary ionic compounds.

65

66

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Solution
1.
Compound

Name

Comment

a. P4O10

Tetraphosphorus
decaoxide

b. Nb2O5

Niobium(V) oxide

c. Li2O2

Lithium peroxide

d. Ti(NO3)4

Titanium(IV) nitrate

Binary covalent compound (Type III), so
preﬁxes are used. The a in deca- is
sometimes dropped.
Type II binary compound containing Nb5
and O2 ions. Niobium is a transition metal
and requires a Roman numeral.
Type I binary compound containing the Li
and O22 (peroxide) ions.
Not a binary compound. Contains the Ti4
and NO3 ions. Titanium is a transition
metal and requires a Roman numeral.

2.
Name

Chemical Formula

Comment

a. Vanadium(V) ﬂuoride

VF5

b. Dioxygen diﬂuoride

O2F2

c. Rubidium peroxide

Rb2O2

d. Gallium oxide

Ga2O3

The compound contains V5 ions
and requires ﬁve F ions for
charge balance.
The preﬁx di- indicates two of
each atom.
Because rubidium is in Group 1A, it
forms only 1 ions. Thus two Rb
ions are needed to balance the 2
charge on the peroxide ion (O22).
Because gallium is in Group 3A, like
aluminum, it forms only 3 ions.
Two Ga3 ions are required to
balance the charge on three O2 ions.
See Exercises 2.63, 2.65, and 2.66.

Acids
Acids can be recognized by the hydrogen
that appears ﬁrst in the formula.

When dissolved in water, certain molecules produce a solution containing free H ions
(protons). These substances, acids, will be discussed in detail in Chapters 4, 14, and 15.
Here we will simply present the rules for naming acids.
An acid can be viewed as a molecule with one or more H ions attached to an anion.
The rules for naming acids depend on whether the anion contains oxygen. If the anion does
not contain oxygen, the acid is named with the preﬁx hydro- and the sufﬁx -ic. For example, when gaseous HCl is dissolved in water, it forms hydrochloric acid. Similarly, HCN
and H2S dissolved in water are called hydrocyanic and hydrosulfuric acids, respectively.
When the anion contains oxygen, the acidic name is formed from the root name of
the anion with a sufﬁx of -ic or -ous, depending on the name of the anion.
1. If the anion name ends in -ate, the sufﬁx -ic is added to the root name. For example,
H2SO4 contains the sulfate anion (SO42) and is called sulfuric acid; H3PO4 contains
the phosphate anion (PO43) and is called phosphoric acid; and HC2H3O2 contains
the acetate ion (C2H3O2) and is called acetic acid.
2. If the anion has an -ite ending, the -ite is replaced by -ous. For example, H2SO3, which
contains sulﬁte (SO32), is named sulfurous acid; and HNO2, which contains nitrite
(NO2), is named nitrous acid.

For Review

TABLE 2.7 Names of Acids*
That Do Not Contain Oxygen
Acid

Name

HF
HCl
HBr
HI
HCN
H2S

Hydroﬂuoric acid
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrobromic acid
Hydroiodic acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Hydrosulfuric acid

67

Does the anion
contain oxygen?

No

Yes
Yes

hydro+ anion root
+ -ic
hydro(anion root)ic acid

Check the ending
of the anion.

-ite

-ate

*Note that these acids are aqueous solutions containing these substances.
anion or element root
+ -ous
(root)ous acid

anion or element root
+ -ic
(root)ic acid

FIGURE 2.25
A ﬂowchart for naming acids. An acid is best considered as one or more H ions attached to
an anion.

TABLE 2.8 Names of Some
Oxygen-Containing Acids
Name

Acid

Anion

Name

Nitric acid
Nitrous acid
Sulfuric acid
Sulfurous acid
Phosphoric acid
Acetic Acid

HClO4
HClO3
HClO2
HClO

Perchlorate
Chlorate
Chlorite
Hypochlorite

Perchloric acid
Chloric acid
Chlorous acid
Hypochlorous acid

Acid
HNO3
HNO2
H2SO4
H2SO3
H3PO4
HC2H3O2

Key Terms
Section 2.2
law of conservation of mass
law of deﬁnite proportion
law of multiple proportions

Section 2.3
atomic masses
atomic weights
Avogadro’s hypothesis

Section 2.4
cathode-ray tube
electron
radioactivity
nuclear atom
nucleus

Section 2.5
proton
neutron
isotopes
atomic number
mass number

The application of these rules can be seen in the names of the acids of the oxyanions
of chlorine:

The names of the most important acids are given in Tables 2.7 and 2.8. An overall strategy
for naming acids is shown in Fig. 2.25.

For Review
Fundamental laws
䊉 Conservation of mass
䊉 Deﬁnite proportion
䊉 Multiple proportions
Dalton’s atomic theory
䊉 All elements are composed of atoms.
䊉 All atoms of a given element are identical.
䊉 Chemical compounds are formed when atoms combine.
䊉 Atoms are not changed in chemical reactions but the way they are bound together
changes.
Early atomic experiments and models
䊉 Thomson model
䊉 Millikan experiment
䊉 Rutherford experiment
䊉 Nuclear model

68

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Section 2.6
chemical bond
covalent bond
molecule
chemical formula
structural formula
space-ﬁlling model
ball-and-stick model
ion
cation
anion
ionic bond
ionic solid (salt)
polyatomic ion

Section 2.7

Atomic structure
䊉 Small dense nucleus contains protons and neutrons.
• Protons—positive charge
• Neutrons—no charge
䊉 Electrons reside outside the nucleus in the relatively large remaining atomic volume.
• Electrons—negative charge, small mass (11840 of proton)
䊉 Isotopes have the same atomic number but different mass numbers.
Atoms combine to form molecules by sharing electrons to form covalent bonds.
䊉 Molecules are described by chemical formulas.
䊉 Chemical formulas show number and type of atoms.
• Structural formula
• Ball-and-stick model
• Space-ﬁlling model

periodic table
metal
nonmetal
group (family)
alkali metals
alkaline earth metals
halogens
noble gases
period

Formation of ions
䊉 Cation—formed by loss of an electron, positive charge
䊉 Anion—formed by gain of an electron, negative charge
䊉 Ionic bonds—formed by interaction of cations and anions

Section 2.8

Compounds are named using a system of rules depending on the type of
compound.
䊉 Binary compounds
• Type I—contain a metal that always forms the same cation
• Type II—contain a metal that can form more than one cation
• Type III—contain two nonmetals
䊉 Compounds containing a polyatomic ion

binary compounds
binary ionic compounds
oxyanions
binary covalent compounds
acid

The periodic table organizes elements in order of increasing atomic number.
䊉 Elements with similar properties are in columns, or groups.
䊉 Metals are in the majority and tend to form cations.
䊉 Nonmetals tend to form anions.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Use Dalton’s atomic theory to account for each of the following.
a. the law of conservation of mass
b. the law of deﬁnite proportion
c. the law of multiple proportions
2. What evidence led to the conclusion that cathode rays had a negative charge?
3. What discoveries were made by J. J. Thomson, Henri Becquerel, and Lord
Rutherford? How did Dalton’s model of the atom have to be modiﬁed to account for these discoveries?
4. Consider Ernest Rutherford’s alpha-particle bombardment experiment illustrated
in Figure 2.12. How did the results of this experiment lead Rutherford away from
the plum pudding model of the atom to propose the nuclear model of the atom?
5. Do the proton and the neutron have exactly the same mass? How do the masses
of the proton and neutron compare to the mass of the electron? Which particles
make the greatest contribution to the mass of an atom? Which particles make
the greatest contribution to the chemical properties of an atom?
6. What is the distinction between atomic number and mass number? Between
mass number and atomic mass?
7. Distinguish between the terms family and period in connection with the periodic table. For which of these terms is the term group also used?
8. The compounds AlCl3, CrCl3, and ICl3 have similar formulas, yet each follows
a different set of rules to name it. Name these compounds, and then compare
and contrast the nomenclature rules used in each case.

Questions

69

9. When metals react with nonmetals, an ionic compound generally results. What
is the predicted general formula for the compound formed between an alkali
metal and sulfur? Between an alkaline earth metal and nitrogen? Between aluminum and a halogen?
10. How would you name HBrO4, KIO3, NaBrO2, and HIO? Refer to Table 2.5 and
the acid nomenclature discussion in the text.

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. Which of the following is true about an individual atom? Explain.
a. An individual atom should be considered to be a solid.
b. An individual atom should be considered to be a liquid.
c. An individual atom should be considered to be a gas.
d. The state of the atom depends on which element it is.
e. An individual atom cannot be considered to be a solid, liquid,
or gas.
Justify your choice, and for choices you did not pick, explain what
is wrong with them.
2. How would you go about ﬁnding the number of “chalk molecules”
it takes to write your name on the board? Provide an explanation
of all you would need to do and a sample calculation.
3. These questions concern the work of J. J. Thomson.
a. From Thomson’s work, which particles do you think he would
feel are most important for the formation of compounds (chemical changes) and why?
b. Of the remaining two subatomic particles, which do you place
second in importance for forming compounds and why?
c. Propose three models that explain Thomson’s ﬁndings and
evaluate them. To be complete you should include Thomson’s
ﬁndings.
4. Heat is applied to an ice cube in a closed container until only
steam is present. Draw a representation of this process, assuming
you can see it at an extremely high level of magniﬁcation. What
happens to the size of the molecules? What happens to the total
mass of the sample?
5. You have a chemical in a sealed glass container ﬁlled with air.
The setup is sitting on a balance as shown below. The chemical
is ignited by means of a magnifying glass focusing sunlight on
the reactant. After the chemical has completely burned, which of
the following is true? Explain your answer.

a.
b.
c.
d.

The balance will read less than 250.0 g.
The balance will read 250.0 g.
The balance will read greater than 250.0 g.
Cannot be determined without knowing the identity of the
chemical.
6. You take three compounds consisting of two elements and decompose them. To determine the relative masses of X, Y, and Z,
you collect and weigh the elements, obtaining the following data:
Elements in Compound

Masses of Elements

X and Y
Y and Z
X and Y

X  0.4 g, Y  4.2 g
Y  1.4 g, Z  1.0 g
X  2.0 g, Y  7.0 g

a.
b.
c.
d.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

What are the assumptions in solving this problem?
What are the relative masses of X, Y, and Z?
What are the chemical formulas of the three compounds?
If you decompose 21 g of compound XY, how much of each
element is present?
The vitamin niacin (nicotinic acid, C6H5NO2) can be isolated from
a variety of natural sources such as liver, yeast, milk, and whole
grain. It also can be synthesized from commercially available materials. Which source of nicotinic acid, from a nutritional view, is
best for use in a multivitamin tablet? Why?
One of the best indications of a useful theory is that it raises more
questions for further experimentation than it originally answered.
Does this apply to Dalton’s atomic theory? Give examples.
Dalton assumed that all atoms of the same element were identical in all their properties. Explain why this assumption is not valid.
Evaluate each of the following as an acceptable name for water:
a. dihydrogen oxide
c. hydrogen hydroxide
b. hydroxide hydride
d. oxygen dihydride
Why do we call Ba(NO3)2 barium nitrate, but we call Fe(NO3)2
iron(II) nitrate?
Why is calcium dichloride not the correct systematic name for
CaCl2?
The common name for NH3 is ammonia. What would be the systematic name for NH3? Support your answer.

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
250.0g

14. What reﬁnements had to be made in Dalton’s atomic theory to account for Gay-Lussac’s results on the combining volumes of gases?

70

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

15. When hydrogen is burned in oxygen to form water, the composition of water formed does not depend on the amount of oxygen
reacted. Interpret this in terms of the law of deﬁnite proportion.
16. The two most reactive families of elements are the halogens and
the alkali metals. How do they differ in their reactivities?
17. Explain the law of conservation of mass, the law of deﬁnite
proportion, and the law of multiple proportions.
18. Section 2.3 describes the postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory.
With some modiﬁcations, these postulates hold up very well
regarding how we view elements, compounds, and chemical
reactions today. Answer the following questions concerning
Dalton’s atomic theory and the modiﬁcations made today.
a. The atom can be broken down into smaller parts. What are the
smaller parts?
b. How are atoms of hydrogen identical to each other and how
can they be different from each other?
c. How are atoms of hydrogen different from atoms of helium?
How can H atoms be similar to He atoms?
d. How is water different from hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) even
though both compounds are composed of only hydrogen and
oxygen?
e. What happens in a chemical reaction and why is mass conserved in a chemical reaction?
19. The contributions of J. J. Thomson and Ernest Rutherford led the
way to today’s understanding of the structure of the atom. What
were their contributions?
20. What is the modern view of the structure of the atom?
21. The number of protons in an atom determines the identity of the atom.
What does the number and arrangement of the electrons in an atom
determine? What does the number of neutrons in an atom determine?
22. Distinguish between the following terms.
a. molecule versus ion
b. covalent bonding versus ionic bonding
c. molecule versus compound
d. anion versus cation
23. Which of the following statements are true? For the false statements, correct them.
a. Most of the known elements are metals.
b. Element 118 should be a nonmetal.
c. Hydrogen has mostly metallic properties.
d. A family of elements is also known as a period of elements.
e. When an alkaline earth metal, A, reacts with a halogen, X, the
formula of the covalent compound formed should be A2X.
24. Each of the following compounds has three possible names listed
for it. For each compound, what is the correct name and why aren’t
the other names used?
a. N2O: nitrogen oxide, nitrogen(I) oxide, dinitrogen monoxide
b. Cu2O: copper oxide, copper(I) oxide, dicopper monoxide
c. Li2O: lithium oxide, lithium(I) oxide, dilithium monoxide

Exercises

a. How is this result interpreted in terms of the law of deﬁnite
proportion?
b. When a volume of H2 reacts with an equal volume of Cl2 at
the same temperature and pressure, what volume of product
having the formula HCl is formed?
26. A reaction of 1 liter of chlorine gas (Cl2) with 3 liters of ﬂuorine
gas (F2) yields 2 liters of a gaseous product. All gas volumes are
at the same temperature and pressure. What is the formula of the
gaseous product?
27. Hydrazine, ammonia, and hydrogen azide all contain only nitrogen and hydrogen. The mass of hydrogen that combines with
1.00 g of nitrogen for each compound is 1.44  101 g, 2.16 
101 g, and 2.40  102 g, respectively. Show how these data
illustrate the law of multiple proportions.
28. Consider 100.0-g samples of two different compounds consisting
only of carbon and oxygen. One compound contains 27.2 g of
carbon and the other has 42.9 g of carbon. How can these data
support the law of multiple proportions if 42.9 is not a multiple
of 27.2? Show that these data support the law of multiple proportions.
29. Early tables of atomic weights (masses) were generated by measuring the mass of a substance that reacts with 1.00 g of oxygen.
Given the following data and taking the atomic mass of hydrogen
as 1.00, generate a table of relative atomic masses for oxygen,
sodium, and magnesium.

Element

Mass That
Combines with
1.00 g Oxygen

Assumed Formula

0.126 g
2.875 g
1.500 g

HO
NaO
MgO

Hydrogen
Sodium
Magnesium

How do your values compare with those in the periodic table?
How do you account for any differences?
30. Indium oxide contains 4.784 g of indium for every 1.000 g of oxygen. In 1869, when Mendeleev ﬁrst presented his version of the
periodic table, he proposed the formula In2O3 for indium oxide.
Before that time it was thought that the formula was InO. What
values for the atomic mass of indium are obtained using these two
formulas? Assume that oxygen has an atomic mass of 16.00.

The Nature of the Atom
31. From the information in this chapter on the mass of the proton,
the mass of the electron, and the sizes of the nucleus and the atom,
calculate the densities of a hydrogen nucleus and a hydrogen atom.
32. If you wanted to make an accurate scale model of the hydrogen
atom and decided that the nucleus would have a diameter of 1 mm,
what would be the diameter of the entire model?

In this section similar exercises are paired.

Development of the Atomic Theory
25. When mixtures of gaseous H2 and gaseous Cl2 react, a product
forms that has the same properties regardless of the relative
amounts of H2 and Cl2 used.

33. In an experiment it was found that the total charge on an oil drop
was 5.93  1018 C. How many negative charges does the drop
contain?
34. A chemist in a galaxy far, far away performed the Millikan oil
drop experiment and got the following results for the charges on

71

Exercises
various drops. Use these data to calculate the charge of the electron in zirkombs.
2.56  1012 zirkombs
3.84  1012 zirkombs

7.68  1012 zirkombs
6.40  1013 zirkombs

35. What are the symbols of the following metals: sodium, radium,
iron, gold, manganese, lead.
36. What are the symbols of the following nonmetals: ﬂuorine, chlorine, bromine, sulfur, oxygen, phosphorus?
37. Give the names of the metals that correspond to the following
symbols: Sn, Pt, Hg, Mg, K, Ag.
38. Give the names of the nonmetals that correspond to the following symbols: As, I, Xe, He, C, Si.
39. a. Classify the following elements as metals or nonmetals:
Mg
Ti
Au
Bi

Si
Ge
B
At

Rn
Eu
Am
Br

b. The distinction between metals and nonmetals is really not a
clear one. Some elements, called metalloids, are intermediate
in their properties. Which of these elements would you
reclassify as metalloids? What other elements in the periodic
table would you expect to be metalloids?
40. a. List the noble gas elements. Which of the noble gases has only
radioactive isotopes? (This situation is indicated on most periodic tables by parentheses around the mass of the element. See
inside front cover.)
b. Which lanthanide element and which transition element have
only radioactive isotopes?
41. In the periodic table, how many elements are found in
a. Group 2A?
c. the nickel group?
b. the oxygen family?
d. Group 8A?
42. In the periodic table, how many elements are found
a. in the halogen group?
b. in the alkali family?
c. in the lanthanide series?
d. classiﬁed as transition metals?
43. How many protons and neutrons are in the nucleus of each of the
following atoms? In a neutral atom of each element, how many
electrons are present?
a. 79Br
d. 133Cs
b. 81Br
e. 3H
239
c.
Pu
f. 56Fe
44. What number of protons and neutrons are contained in the nucleus
of each of the following atoms? Assuming each atom is uncharged,
what number of electrons are present?
a. 235
d. 208
92U
82Pb
13
b. 6C
e. 86
37Rb
c. 57
f. 41
26Fe
20Ca
45. Write the atomic symbol (ZAX) for each of the following isotopes.
a. Z  8, number of neutrons  9
b. the isotope of chlorine in which A  37

c. Z  27, A  60
d. number of protons  26, number of neutrons  31
e. the isotope of I with a mass number of 131
f. Z  3, number of neutrons  4
46. Write the atomic symbol (ZAX) for each of the isotopes described
below.
a. number of protons  27, number of neutrons  31
b. the isotope of boron with mass number 10
c. Z  12, A  23
d. atomic number 53, number of neutrons  79
e. Z  9, number of neutrons  10
f. number of protons  29, mass number 65
47. What is the symbol for an ion with 63 protons, 60 electrons, and
88 neutrons? If an ion contains 50 protons, 68 neutrons, and
48 electrons, what is its symbol?
48. What is the symbol of an ion with 16 protons, 18 neutrons, and
18 electrons? What is the symbol for an ion that has 16 protons,
16 neutrons, and 18 electrons?
49. Complete the following table:

Symbol

Number of
Protons in
Nucleus

Number of
Neutrons in
Nucleus

Number of
Electrons

20
23

20
28

20

35
15

44
16

Net
Charge

238
92U

2

89
39Y

36
3

50.

Symbol

Number of
Protons in
Nucleus

Number of
Neutrons in
Nucleus

Number of
Electrons

26
85
13

33
125
14
76

86
10
54

Net Charge

53
2
26Fe

3

2

51. For each of the following sets of elements, label each as either
noble gases, halogens, alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, or transition metals.
a. Ti, Fe, Ag
d. Ne, Kr, Xe
b. Mg, Sr, Ba
e. F, Br, I
c. Li, K, Rb
52. Consider the elements of Group 4A (the “carbon family”): C, Si,
Ge, Sn, and Pb. What is the trend in metallic character as one goes
down this group? What is the trend in metallic character going
from left to right across a period in the periodic table?

72

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

53. Would you expect each of the following atoms to gain or lose
electrons when forming ions? What ion is the most likely in each
case?
a. Ra
c. P
e. Br
b. In
d. Te
f. Rb
54. For each of the following atomic numbers, use the periodic table
to write the formula (including the charge) for the simple ion that
the element is most likely to form in ionic compounds.
a. 13
c. 56
e. 87
b. 34
d. 7
f. 35

Nomenclature
55. Name the compounds in parts a–d and write the formulas for the
compounds in parts e–h.
a. NaBr
e. strontium ﬂuoride
b. Rb2O
f. aluminum selenide
c. CaS
g. potassium nitride
d. AlI3
h. magnesium phosphide
56. Name the compounds in parts a–d and write the formulas for the
compounds in parts e–h.
a. Hg2O
e. tin(II) nitride
b. FeBr3
f. cobalt(III) iodide
c. CoS
g. mercury(II) oxide
d. TiCl4
h. chromium(VI) sulﬁde
57. Name each of the following compounds:
a. CsF
c. Ag2S
e. TiO2
b. Li3N
d. MnO2
f. Sr3P2
58. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. zinc chloride
d. aluminum sulﬁde
b. tin(IV) ﬂuoride
e. mercury(I) selenide
c. calcium nitride
f. silver iodide
59. Name each of the following compounds:
a. BaSO3
c. KMnO4
b. NaNO2
d. K2Cr2O7
60. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. chromium(III) hydroxide
c. lead(IV) carbonate
b. magnesium cyanide
d. ammonium acetate
61. Name each of the following compounds:
a.
O
N

b.

I
Cl

c. SO2
d. P2S5
62. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. diboron trioxide
c. dinitrogen monoxide
b. arsenic pentaﬂuoride
d. sulfur hexachloride
63. Name each of the following compounds:
a. CuI
c. CoI2
b. CuI2
d. Na2CO3

e. NaHCO3
f. S4N4
g. SF6

h. NaOCl
i. BaCrO4
j. NH4NO3

64. Name each of the following compounds:
a. HC2H3O2
g. H2SO4
b. NH4NO2
h. Sr3N2
c. Co2S3
i. Al2(SO3)3
d. ICl
j. SnO2
e. Pb3(PO4)2
k. Na2CrO4
f. KIO3
l. HClO
65. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. sulfur diﬂuoride
b. sulfur hexaﬂuoride
c. sodium dihydrogen phosphate
d. lithium nitride
e. chromium(III) carbonate
f. tin(II) ﬂuoride
g. ammonium acetate
h. ammonium hydrogen sulfate
i. cobalt(III) nitrate
j. mercury(I) chloride
k. potassium chlorate
l. sodium hydride
66. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. chromium(VI) oxide
b. disulfur dichloride
c. nickel(II) ﬂuoride
d. potassium hydrogen phosphate
e. aluminum nitride
f. ammonia
g. manganese(IV) sulﬁde
h. sodium dichromate
i. ammonium sulﬁte
j. carbon tetraiodide
67. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. sodium oxide
h. copper(I) chloride
b. sodium peroxide
i. gallium arsenide
c. potassium cyanide
j. cadmium selenide
d. copper(II) nitrate
k. zinc sulﬁde
e. selenium tetrabromide
l. nitrous acid
f. iodous acid
m. diphosphorus pentoxide
g. lead(IV) sulﬁde
68. Write the formula for each of the following compounds:
a. ammonium hydrogen phosphate
b. mercury(I) sulﬁde
c. silicon dioxide
d. sodium sulﬁte
e. aluminum hydrogen sulfate
f. nitrogen trichloride
g. hydrobromic acid
h. bromous acid
i. perbromic acid
j. potassium hydrogen sulﬁde
k. calcium iodide
l. cesium perchlorate

Additional Exercises
69. Name the following acids illustrated below.

a.

b.

c.
H

C

75.

N
O
Cl

d.

S
P

e.

70. Each of the following compounds is incorrectly named. What is
wrong with each name, and what is the correct name for each
compound?
a. FeCl3, iron chloride
b. NO2, nitrogen(IV) oxide
c. CaO, calcium(II) monoxide
d. Al2S3, dialuminum trisulﬁde
e. Mg(C2H3O2)2, manganese diacetate
f. FePO4, iron(II) phosphide
g. P2S5, phosphorous sulﬁde
h. Na2O2, sodium oxide
i. HNO3, nitrate acid
j. H2S, sulfuric acid

76.

77.

Additional Exercises
37
35
71. Chlorine has two natural isotopes: 17
Cl and 17
Cl. Hydrogen reacts
with chlorine to form the compound HCl. Would a given amount
of hydrogen react with different masses of the two chlorine isotopes? Does this conﬂict with the law of deﬁnite proportion? Why
or why not?
72. Which of the following statements is(are) true? For the false statements, correct them.
a. All particles in the nucleus of an atom are charged.
b. The atom is best described as a uniform sphere of matter in
which electrons are embedded.
c. The mass of the nucleus is only a very small fraction of the
mass of the entire atom.
d. The volume of the nucleus is only a very small fraction of the
total volume of the atom.
e. The number of neutrons in a neutral atom must equal the number of electrons.
73. The isotope of an unknown element, X, has a mass number of 79.
The most stable ion of the isotope has 36 electrons and forms a
binary compound with sodium having a formula of Na2X. Which
of the following statements is(are) true? For the false statements,
correct them.
a. The binary compound formed between X and ﬂuorine will be
a covalent compound.
b. The isotope of X contains 38 protons.
c. The isotope of X contains 41 neutrons.
d. The identity of X is strontium, Sr.
74. For each of the following ions, indicate the total number of protons
and electrons in the ion. For the positive ions in the list, predict

78.

79.

80.
81.

82.

73

the formula of the simplest compound formed between each
positive ion and the oxide ion. For the negative ions in the list,
predict the formula of the simplest compound formed between
each negative ion and the aluminum ion.
a. Fe2
e. S2
b. Fe3
f. P3
2
c. Ba
g. Br

d. Cs
h. N3
The formulas and common names for several substances are given
below. Give the systematic names for these substances.
a. sugar of lead
Pb(C2H3O2)2
b. blue vitrol
CuSO4
c. quicklime
CaO
d. Epsom salts
MgSO4
e. milk of magnesia
Mg(OH)2
f. gypsum
CaSO4
g. laughing gas
N2O
Identify each of the following elements:
a. a member of the same family as oxygen whose most stable ion
contains 54 electrons
b. a member of the alkali metal family whose most stable ion
contains 36 electrons
c. a noble gas with 18 protons in the nucleus
d. a halogen with 85 protons and 85 electrons
An element’s most stable ion forms an ionic compound with
bromine, having the formula XBr2. If the ion of element X has a
mass number of 230 and has 86 electrons, what is the identity of
the element, and how many neutrons does it have?
A certain element has only two naturally occurring isotopes: one
with 18 neutrons and the other with 20 neutrons. The element
forms 1 charged ions when in ionic compounds. Predict the identity of the element. What number of electrons does the 1 charged
ion have?
The designations 1A through 8A used for certain families of the
periodic table are helpful for predicting the charges on ions in binary ionic compounds. In these compounds, the metals generally
take on a positive charge equal to the family number, while the
nonmetals take on a negative charge equal to the family number
minus eight. Thus the compound between sodium and chlorine
contains Na ions and Cl ions and has the formula NaCl. Predict the formula and the name of the binary compound formed
from the following pairs of elements.
a. Ca and N
e. Ba and I
b. K and O
f. Al and Se
c. Rb and F
g. Cs and P
d. Mg and S
h. In and Br
By analogy with phosphorous compounds, name the following:
Na3AsO4, H3AsO4, Mg3(SbO4)2.
A sample of H2SO4 contains 2.02 g of hydrogen, 32.07 g of sulfur, and 64.00 g of oxygen. How many grams of sulfur and grams
of oxygen are present in a second sample of H2SO4 containing
7.27 g of hydrogen?
In a reaction, 34.0 g of chromium(III) oxide reacts with 12.1 g of
aluminum to produce chromium and aluminum oxide. If 23.3 g
of chromium is produced, what mass of aluminum oxide is
produced?

74

Chapter Two Atoms, Molecules, and Ions

Challenge Problems
83. The elements in one of the groups in the periodic table are often
called the coinage metals. Identify the elements in this group based
on your own experience.
84. Reaction of 2.0 L of hydrogen gas with 1.0 L of oxygen gas yields
2.0 L of water vapor. All gases are at the same temperature and
pressure. Show how these data support the idea that oxygen gas
is a diatomic molecule. Must we consider hydrogen to be a diatomic molecule to explain these results?
85. A combustion reaction involves the reaction of a substance with
oxygen gas. The complete combustion of any hydrocarbon (binary
compound of carbon and hydrogen) produces carbon dioxide and
water as the only products. Octane is a hydrocarbon that is found
in gasoline. Complete combustion of octane produces 8 liters of
carbon dioxide for every 9 liters of water vapor (both measured
at the same temperature and pressure). What is the ratio of carbon atoms to hydrogen atoms in a molecule of octane?
86. A chemistry instructor makes the following claim: “Consider that
if the nucleus were the size of a grape, the electrons would be
about 1 mile away on average.” Is this claim reasonably accurate?
Provide mathematical support.
87. Two elements, R and Q, combine to form two binary compounds.
In the ﬁrst compound, 14.0 g of R combines with 3.00 g of Q. In
the second compound, 7.00 g of R combines with 4.50 g of Q.
Show that these data are in accord with the law of multiple proportions. If the formula of the second compound is RQ, what is
the formula of the ﬁrst compound?
88. The early alchemists used to do an experiment in which water was
boiled for several days in a sealed glass container. Eventually,
some solid residue would appear in the bottom of the ﬂask, which
was interpreted to mean that some of the water in the ﬂask had
been converted into “earth.” When Lavoisier repeated this experiment, he found that the water weighed the same before and after heating and the mass of the ﬂask plus the solid residue equaled
the original mass of the ﬂask. Were the alchemists correct? Explain what really happened. (This experiment is described in the
article by A. F. Scott in Scientiﬁc American, January 1984.)
89. Each of the following statements is true, but Dalton might have
had trouble explaining some of them with his atomic theory. Give
explanations for the following statements.
a. The space-ﬁlling models for ethyl alcohol and dimethyl ether
are shown below.

C
O
H

These two compounds have the same composition by mass
(52% carbon, 13% hydrogen, and 35% oxygen), yet the two
have different melting points, boiling points, and solubilities
in water.
b. Burning wood leaves an ash that is only a small fraction of
the mass of the original wood.
c. Atoms can be broken down into smaller particles.

d. One sample of lithium hydride is 87.4% lithium by mass, while
another sample of lithium hydride is 74.9% lithium by mass.
However, the two samples have the same properties.
90. You have two distinct gaseous compounds made from element X
and element Y. The mass percents are as follows:
Compound I: 30.43% X, 69.57% Y
Compound II: 63.64% X, 36.36% Y
In their natural standard states, element X and element Y exist as
gases. (Monatomic? Diatomic? Triatomic? That is for you to determine.) When you react “gas X” with “gas Y” to make the products, you get the following data (all at standard pressure and
temperature):
1 volume “gas X”  2 volumes “gas Y” ¡
2 volumes compound I
2 volumes “gas X”  1 volume “gas Y” ¡
2 volumes compound II
Assume the simplest possible formulas for reactants and products
in the chemical equations above. Then, determine the relative
atomic masses of element X and element Y.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

91. What is the systematic name of Ta2O5? If the charge on the metal
remained constant and then sulfur was substituted for oxygen, how
would the formula change? What is the difference in the total number of protons between Ta2O5 and its sulfur analog?
92. A binary ionic compound is known to contain a cation with 51 protons and 48 electrons. The anion contains one-third the number
of protons as the cation. The number of electrons in the anion is
equal to the number of protons plus 1. What is the formula of this
compound? What is the name of this compound?
93. Using the information in Table 2.1, answer the following questions. In an ion with an unknown charge, the total mass of all the
electrons was determined to be 2.55  1026 g, while the total
mass of its protons was 5.34  1023 g. What is the identity and
charge of this ion? What is the symbol and mass number of a neutral atom whose total mass of its electrons is 3.92  1026 g, while
its neutrons have a mass of 9.35  1023 g?

Marathon Problem
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

94. You have gone back in time and are working with Dalton on a
table of relative masses. Following are his data.
0.602 g gas A reacts with 0.295 g gas B
0.172 g gas B reacts with 0.401 g gas C
0.320 g gas A reacts with 0.374 g gas C
a. Assuming simplest formulas (AB, BC, and AC), construct a
table of relative masses for Dalton.

Marathon Problem
b. Knowing some history of chemistry, you tell Dalton that if he
determines the volumes of the gases reacted at constant temperature and pressure, he need not assume simplest formulas.
You collect the following data:
6 volumes gas A  1 volume gas B S 4 volumes product
1 volume gas B  4 volumes gas C S 4 volumes product
3 volumes gas A  2 volumes gas C S 6 volumes product

75

Write the simplest balanced equations, and ﬁnd the actual
relative masses of the elements. Explain your reasoning.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

3 Stoichiometry

C

hemical reactions have a profound effect on our lives. There are many examples:
Food is converted to energy in the human body; nitrogen and hydrogen are combined to
form ammonia, which is used as a fertilizer; fuels and plastics are produced from petroleum; the starch in plants is synthesized from carbon dioxide and water using energy from
sunlight; human insulin is produced in laboratories by bacteria; cancer is induced in humans by substances from our environment; and so on, in a seemingly endless list. The
central activity of chemistry is to understand chemical changes such as these, and the
study of reactions occupies a central place in this book. We will examine why reactions
occur, how fast they occur, and the speciﬁc pathways they follow.
In this chapter we will consider the quantities of materials consumed and produced
in chemical reactions. This area of study is called chemical stoichiometry (pronounced
stoy ke– om etry). To understand chemical stoichiometry, you must ﬁrst understand the
concept of relative atomic masses.

3.1

Counting by Weighing

Suppose you work in a candy store that sells gourmet jelly beans by the bean. People
come in and ask for 50 beans, 100 beans, 1000 beans, and so on, and you have to count
them out—a tedious process at best. As a good problem solver, you try to come up with
a better system. It occurs to you that it might be far more efﬁcient to buy a scale and count
the jelly beans by weighing them. How can you count jelly beans by weighing them?
What information about the individual beans do you need to know?
Assume that all of the jelly beans are identical and that each has a mass of 5 g. If a
customer asks for 1000 jelly beans, what mass of jelly beans would be required? Each
bean has a mass of 5 g, so you would need 1000 beans  5 g/bean, or 5000 g (5 kg). It
takes just a few seconds to weigh out 5 kg of jelly beans. It would take much longer to
count out 1000 of them.
In reality, jelly beans are not identical. For example, let’s assume that you weigh
10 beans individually and get the following results:
Bean

Mass

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

5.1 g
5.2 g
5.0 g
4.8 g
4.9 g
5.0 g
5.0 g
5.1 g
4.9 g
5.0 g

Jelly beans can be counted by weighing.

77

78

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
Can we count these nonidentical beans by weighing? Yes. The key piece of information
we need is the average mass of the jelly beans. Let’s compute the average mass for our
10-bean sample.
Average mass 

total mass of beans
number of beans

5.1 g  5.2 g  5.0 g  4.8 g  4.9 g  5.0 g  5.0 g  5.1 g  4.9 g  5.0 g
10
50.0

 5.0 g
10


The average mass of a jelly bean is 5.0 g. Thus, to count out 1000 beans, we need to
weigh out 5000 g of beans. This sample of beans, in which the beans have an average
mass of 5.0 g, can be treated exactly like a sample where all of the beans ae identical.
Objects do not need to have identical masses to be counted by weighing. We simply need
to know the average mass of the objects. For purposes of counting, the objects behave as
though they were all identical, as though they each actually had the average mass.
We count atoms in exactly the same way. Because atoms are so small, we deal with
samples of matter that contain huge numbers of atoms. Even if we could see the atoms it
would not be possible to count them directly. Thus we determine the number of atoms in
a given sample by ﬁnding its mass. However, just as with jelly beans, to relate the mass
to a number of atoms, we must know the average mass of the atoms.

3.2

Atomic Masses

As we saw in Chapter 2, the ﬁrst quantitative information about atomic masses came from
the work of Dalton, Gay-Lussac, Lavoisier, Avogadro, and Berzelius. By observing the
proportions in which elements combine to form various compounds, nineteenth-century
chemists calculated relative atomic masses. The modern system of atomic masses, instituted in 1961, is based on 12C (“carbon twelve”) as the standard. In this system, 12C is assigned a mass of exactly 12 atomic mass units (amu), and the masses of all other atoms
are given relative to this standard.
The most accurate method currently available for comparing the masses of atoms involves the use of the mass spectrometer. In this instrument, diagramed in Fig. 3.1, atoms
or molecules are passed into a beam of high-speed electrons, which knock electrons off
the atoms or molecules being analyzed and change them into positive ions. An applied

Detector plate
Ion-accelerating
electric field
Positive
ions

Least
massive ions

Accelerated
ion beam
Most
massive
ions

Sample

Heating device
to vaporize
sample

Slits

Magnetic field

Electron
beam

FIGURE 3.1
(left) A scientist injecting a sample into a mass spectrometer. (above) Schematic diagram of a mass spectrometer.

3.2 Atomic Masses

79

electric ﬁeld then accelerates these ions into a magnetic ﬁeld. Because an accelerating ion
produces its own magnetic ﬁeld, an interaction with the applied magnetic ﬁeld occurs,
which tends to change the path of the ion. The amount of path deﬂection for each ion depends on its mass—the most massive ions are deﬂected the smallest amount—which causes
the ions to separate, as shown in Fig. 3.1. A comparison of the positions where the ions
hit the detector plate gives very accurate values of their relative masses. For example,
when 12C and 13C are analyzed in a mass spectrometer, the ratio of their masses is found
to be
Mass 13C
 1.0836129
Mass 12C
Since the atomic mass unit is deﬁned such that the mass of 12C is exactly 12 atomic mass
units, then on this same scale,
Mass of 13C  11.08361292112 amu2  13.003355 amu
h

Exact number
by deﬁnition

Most elements occur in nature as
mixtures of isotopes; thus atomic masses
are usually average values.

The masses of other atoms can be determined in a similar fashion.
The mass for each element is given in the table inside the front cover of this text.
This value, even though it is actually a mass, is (for historical reasons) sometimes called
the atomic weight for each element.
Look at the value of the atomic mass of carbon given in this table. You might expect to see 12, since we said the system of atomic masses is based on 12C. However,
the number given for carbon is not 12 but 12.01. Why? The reason for this apparent
discrepancy is that the carbon found on earth (natural carbon) is a mixture of the isotopes 12C, 13C, and 14C. All three isotopes have six protons, but they have six, seven,
and eight neutrons, respectively. Because natural carbon is a mixture of isotopes, the
atomic mass we use for carbon is an average value reﬂecting the average of the isotopes composing it.
The average atomic mass for carbon is computed as follows: It is known that natural carbon is composed of 98.89% 12C atoms and 1.11% 13C atoms. The amount of 14C
is negligibly small at this level of precision. Using the masses of 12C (exactly 12 amu)
and 13C (13.003355 amu), we can calculate the average atomic mass for natural carbon
as follows:
98.89% of 12 amu  1.11% of 13.0034 amu 
10.98892112 amu2  10.01112113.0034 amu2  12.01 amu

It is much easier to weigh out 600 hex nuts
than count them one by one.

In this text we will call the average mass for an element the average atomic mass or,
simply, the atomic mass for that element.
Even though natural carbon does not contain a single atom with mass 12.01, for stoichiometric purposes, we can consider carbon to be composed of only one type of atom
with a mass of 12.01. This enables us to count atoms of natural carbon by weighing a
sample of carbon.
Recall from Section 3.1 that counting by weighing works if you know the average
mass of the units being counted. Counting by weighing works just the same for atoms as
for jelly beans. For natural carbon with an average mass of 12.01 atomic mass units, to
obtain 1000 atoms would require weighing out 12,010 atomic mass units of natural carbon
(a mixture of 12C and 13C).
As in the case of carbon, the mass for each element listed in the table inside the front
cover of the text is an average value based on the isotopic composition of the naturally
occurring element. For instance, the mass listed for hydrogen (1.008) is the average mass
for natural hydrogen, which is a mixture of 1H and 2H (deuterium). No atom of hydrogen
actually has the mass 1.008.

80

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Buckyballs Teach Some History
Robert J. Poreda of the University of Rochester seem to
strongly support the impact theory. Examining sediment
from China and Japan, the team found fullerenes encapsulating argon and helium gas atoms whose isotopic composition indicates that they are extraterrestrial in origin. For
example, the ratio of 32He to 42He found in the fullerenes is
100 times greater than the ratio for helium found in the
earth’s atmosphere. Likewise, the isotopic composition of
the fullerene-trapped argon atoms is quite different from that
found on earth.
Fullerenes include spherical C60 carbon molecules
(“buckyballs”) whose cavities can trap other atoms such as
helium and argon. (See the accompanying ﬁgure.) The scientists postulate that the fullerenes originated in stars or
collapsing gas clouds where the noble gas atoms were
trapped as the fullerenes formed. These fullerenes were
then somehow incorporated into the object that eventually
hit the earth. Based on the isotopic compositions, the
geochemists estimate that the impacting body must have

bout 250 million years ago, 90% of life on earth was
destroyed in some sort of cataclysmic event. This
event, which ended the Permian period and began the
Triassic (the P-T boundary), is the most devastating mass
extinction in the earth’s history—far surpassing the catastrophe 65 million years ago that wiped out the dinosaurs
(the K-T boundary). In 1979 geologist Walter Alvarez and
his Nobel Prize–winning physicist father Luis Alvarez suggested that unusually high concentrations of iridium in
rocks laid down at the K-T boundary meant that an asteroid had hit the earth, causing tremendous devastation. In
the last 20 years much evidence has accumulated to support this hypothesis, including identiﬁcation of the location of the probable crater caused by the impact in the
ocean near Mexico.
Were the P-T boundary extinctions also caused by an
extraterrestrial object or by some event on earth, such as a
massive volcano explosion? Recent discoveries by geochemists Luann Becker of the University of Washington and

A

In addition to being useful for determining accurate mass values for individual atoms,
the mass spectrometer is used to determine the isotopic composition of a natural element.
For example, when a sample of natural neon is injected into a mass spectrometer, the mass
spectrum shown in Fig. 3.2 is obtained. The areas of the “peaks” or the heights of the bars
20
22
indicate the relative abundances of 10
Ne, 21
10 Ne, and 10 Ne atoms.

Relative number of atoms

Ion beam intensity at detector

100

18

19

20

21

22

23

Mass number
(a)

(b)

80
60
40
20

9
.3

0

24

91

20

21

22

Mass number
(c)

FIGURE 3.2
(a) Neon gas glowing in a discharge tube. The relative intensities of the signals recorded when natural neon is injected into a mass
spectrometer, represented in terms of (b) “peaks” and (c) a bar graph. The relative areas of the peaks are 0.9092 (20Ne), 0.00257
(21Ne), and 0.0882 (22Ne); natural neon is therefore 90.92% 20Ne, 0.257% 21Ne, and 8.82% 22Ne.

3.2 Atomic Masses

81

been 10 kilometers in diameter, which is comparable in
size to the asteroid that is assumed to have killed the
dinosaurs.
One factor that had previously cast doubt on an asteroid collision as the cause of the P-T catastrophe was
the lack of iridium found in sediments from this period.
However, Becker and other scientists argue that this absence probably means the impacting object may have been
a comet rather than an asteroid. It is also possible that
such a blow could have intensiﬁed the volcanism already
under way on earth at that time, delivering a “one-two
punch” that almost obliterated life on earth, according to
Becker.
It is ironic that “buckyballs,” which made big news
when they were recently synthesized for the ﬁrst time in the
laboratory, actually have been around for millions of years
and have some very interesting history to teach us.

Figure from Chemical and Engineering News, Feb. 26, 2001, p. 9.
Reprinted by permission of Joseph Wilmhoff.

Sample Exercise 3.1

Isotope ratios of the noble gas atoms inside celestial buckyballs
indicate that these ancient carbon cages formed in a stellar
environment, not on earth.

The Average Mass of an Element
When a sample of natural copper is vaporized and injected into a mass spectrometer, the
results shown in Fig. 3.3 are obtained. Use these data to compute the average mass of
natural copper. (The mass values for 63Cu and 65Cu are 62.93 amu and 64.93 amu,
respectively.)
Solution
As shown by the graph, of every 100 atoms of natural copper, 69.09 are 63Cu and 30.91
are 65Cu. Thus the mass of 100 atoms of natural copper is
169.09 atoms2a62.93

Relative number of atoms

Copper nugget.

The average mass of a copper atom is

100
80

6355 amu
 63.55 amu/atom
100 atoms

69.09

60
40

30.91

20
0

amu
amu
b  130.91 atoms2a64.93
b  6355 amu
atom
atom

63
65
Mass number

FIGURE 3.3
Mass spectrum of natural copper.

This mass value is used in doing calculations involving the reactions of copper and is the
value given in the table inside the front cover of this book.
Reality Check: When you ﬁnish a calculation, you should always check whether your
answer makes sense. In this case our answer of 63.55 amu is between the masses of the
atoms that make up natural copper. This makes sense. The answer could not be smaller
than 62.93 amu or larger than 64.93 amu.
See Exercises 3.27 and 3.28.

82

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

3.3
The SI deﬁnition of the mole is the
amount of a substance that contains as
many entities as there are in exactly 12 g
of carbon-12.
Avogadro’s number is 6.022  1023. One
mole of anything is 6.022  1023 units of
that substance.

The mass of 1 mole of an element is
equal to its atomic mass in grams.

FIGURE 3.4
Proceeding clockwise from the top, samples
containing one mole each of copper,
aluminum, iron, sulfur, iodine, and (in the
center) mercury.

The Mole

Because samples of matter typically contain so many atoms, a unit of measure called the
mole has been established for use in counting atoms. For our purposes, it is most convenient to deﬁne the mole (abbreviated mol) as the number equal to the number of carbon
atoms in exactly 12 grams of pure 12C. Techniques such as mass spectrometry, which count
atoms very precisely, have been used to determine this number as 6.02214  1023
(6.022  1023 will be sufﬁcient for our purposes). This number is called Avogadro’s
number to honor his contributions to chemistry. One mole of something consists of
6.022 ⫻ 1023 units of that substance. Just as a dozen eggs is 12 eggs, a mole of eggs is
6.022 1023 eggs.
The magnitude of the number 6.022  1023 is very difﬁcult to imagine. To give you
some idea, 1 mole of seconds represents a span of time 4 million times as long as the
earth has already existed, and 1 mole of marbles is enough to cover the entire earth to a
depth of 50 miles! However, since atoms are so tiny, a mole of atoms or molecules is a
perfectly manageable quantity to use in a reaction (see Fig. 3.4).
How do we use the mole in chemical calculations? Recall that Avogadro’s number is
deﬁned as the number of atoms in exactly 12 grams of 12C. This means that 12 grams of
12
C contains 6.022  1023 atoms. It also means that a 12.01-gram sample of natural carbon
contains 6.022  1023 atoms (a mixture of 12C, 13C, and 14C atoms, with an average atomic
mass of 12.01). Since the ratio of the masses of the samples (12 g12.01 g) is the same
as the ratio of the masses of the individual components (12 amu12.01 amu), the two samples contain the same number of atoms (6.022  1023).
To be sure this point is clear, think of oranges with an average mass of 0.5 pound
each and grapefruit with an average mass of 1.0 pound each. Any two sacks for which
the sack of grapefruit weighs twice as much as the sack of oranges will contain the same
number of pieces of fruit. The same idea extends to atoms. Compare natural carbon (average mass of 12.01) and natural helium (average mass of 4.003). A sample of 12.01 grams
of natural carbon contains the same number of atoms as 4.003 grams of natural helium.
Both samples contain 1 mole of atoms (6.022  1023). Table 3.1 gives more examples
that illustrate this basic idea.
Thus the mole is deﬁned such that a sample of a natural element with a mass equal
to the element’s atomic mass expressed in grams contains 1 mole of atoms. This deﬁnition

3.3 The Mole

TABLE 3.1

83

Comparison of 1 Mole Samples of Various Elements

Element

Number of Atoms Present

Aluminum
Copper
Iron
Sulfur
Iodine
Mercury

6.022
6.022
6.022
6.022
6.022
6.022








Mass of Sample (g)

23

10
1023
1023
1023
1023
1023

26.98
63.55
55.85
32.07
126.9
200.6

also ﬁxes the relationship between the atomic mass unit and the gram. Since 6.022  1023
atoms of carbon (each with a mass of 12 amu) have a mass of 12 g, then
16.022  1023 atoms2a

12 amu
b  12 g
atom

and
6.022  1023 amu  1 g

h
Exact
number

This relationship can be used to derive the unit factor needed to convert between atomic
mass units and grams.
Sample Exercise 3.2

Determining the Mass of a Sample of Atoms
Americium is an element that does not occur naturally. It can be made in very small
amounts in a device known as a particle accelerator. Compute the mass in grams of a
sample of americium containing six atoms.
Solution
From the table inside the front cover of the text, we note that one americium atom has a
mass of 243 amu. Thus the mass of six atoms is
6 atoms  243

amu
 1.46  103 amu
atom

Using the relationship
6.022  1023 amu  1 g
we write the conversion factor for converting atomic mass units to grams:
1g
6.022  1023 amu
The mass of six americium atoms in grams is
1.46  103 amu 

1g
 2.42  1021 g
6.022  1023 amu

Reality Check: Since this sample contains only six atoms, the mass should be very small
as the amount 2.42  1021 g indicates.
See Exercise 3.33.

84

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Elemental Analysis Catches Elephant Poachers
n an effort to combat the poaching of elephants by controlling illegal exports of ivory, scientists are now using
the isotopic composition of ivory trinkets and elephant
tusks to identify the region of Africa where the elephant
lived. Using a mass spectrometer, scientists analyze the
ivory for the relative amounts of 12C, 13C, 14N, 15N, 86Sr,
and 87Sr to determine the diet of the elephant and thus its
place of origin. For example, because grasses use a different photosynthetic pathway to produce glucose than do
trees, grasses have a slightly different 13C12C ratio from
that of trees. They have different ratios because each time
a carbon atom is added in going from simpler to more complex compounds, the more massive 13C is disfavored relative to 12C because it reacts more slowly. Because trees use
more steps to build up glucose, they end up with a smaller
13
C12C ratio in their leaves relative to grasses, and this
difference is then reﬂected in the tissues of elephants. Thus

I

scientists can tell whether a particular tusk came from a
savanna-dwelling elephant (grass-eating) or from a treebrowsing elephant.
Similarly, because the ratios of 15N14N and 87Sr86Sr
in elephant tusks also vary depending on the region of Africa
the elephant inhabits, they can be used to trace the elephant’s
origin. In fact, using these techniques, scientists have reported being able to discriminate between elephants living
only about 100 miles apart.
There is now international concern about the dwindling
elephant populations in Africa—their numbers have decreased signiﬁcantly in recent years. This concern has led
to bans in the export of ivory from many countries in Africa.
However, a few nations still allow ivory to be exported. Thus,
to enforce the trade restrictions, the origin of a given piece
of ivory must be established. It is hoped that the “isotope
signature” of the ivory can be used for this purpose.

To do chemical calculations, you must understand what the mole means and how to
determine the number of moles in a given mass of a substance. These procedures are illustrated in Sample Exercises 3.3 and 3.4.
Sample Exercise 3.3

Determining Moles of Atoms
Aluminum (Al) is a metal with a high strength-to-mass ratio and a high resistance to corrosion; thus it is often used for structural purposes. Compute both the number of moles
of atoms and the number of atoms in a 10.0-g sample of aluminum.

(left) Pure aluminum. (right) Aluminum alloys are used for many high-quality bicycle
components, such as this chain wheel.

Solution
The mass of 1 mole (6.022  1023 atoms) of aluminum is 26.98 g. The sample we are
considering has a mass of 10.0 g. Since the mass is less than 26.98 g, this sample contains
less than 1 mole of aluminum atoms. We can calculate the number of moles of aluminum
atoms in 10.0 g as follows:
10.0 g Al 

1 mol Al
 0.371 mol Al atoms
26.98 g Al

3.3 The Mole

85

The number of atoms in 10.0 g (0.371 mol) of aluminum is
0.371 mol Al 

6.022  1023 atoms
 2.23  1023 atoms
1 mol Al

Reality Check: One mole of Al has a mass of 26.98 g and contains 6.022  1023
atoms. Our sample is 10.0 g, which is roughly 13 of 26.98. Thus the calculated
amount should be on the order of 13 of 6  1023, which it is.
See Exercise 3.34.
Sample Exercise 3.4

Calculating Numbers of Atoms
A silicon chip used in an integrated circuit of a microcomputer has a mass of 5.68 mg.
How many silicon (Si) atoms are present in the chip?
Solution
The strategy for doing this problem is to convert from milligrams of silicon to grams of
silicon, then to moles of silicon, and ﬁnally to atoms of silicon:

Always check to see if your answer is
sensible.

1 g Si
 5.68  103 g Si
1000 mg Si
1 mol Si
5.68  103 g Si 
 2.02  104 mol Si
28.09 g Si
6.022  1023 atoms
2.02  104 mol Si 
 1.22  1020 atoms
1 mol Si
5.68 mg Si 

Paying careful attention to units and
making sure the answer is reasonable
can help you detect an inverted
conversion factor or a number that was
incorrectly entered in your calculator.

Reality Check: Note that 5.68 mg of silicon is clearly much less than 1 mol of silicon
(which has a mass of 28.09 g), so the ﬁnal answer of 1.22  1020 atoms (compared with
6.022  1023 atoms) is in the right direction.
See Exercise 3.35.
Sample Exercise 3.5

Calculating the Number of Moles and Mass
Cobalt (Co) is a metal that is added to steel to improve its resistance to corrosion. Calculate both the number of moles in a sample of cobalt containing 5.00  1020 atoms and
the mass of the sample.
Solution
Note that the sample of 5.00  1020 atoms of cobalt is less than 1 mole (6.022  1023 atoms)
of cobalt. What fraction of a mole it represents can be determined as follows:
5.00  1020 atoms Co 

1 mol Co
 8.30  104 mol Co
6.022  1023 atoms Co

Since the mass of 1 mole of cobalt atoms is 58.93 g, the mass of 5.00  1020 atoms can
be determined as follows:
Fragments of cobalt metal.

8.30  104 mol Co 

58.93 g Co
 4.89  102 g Co
1 mol Co

Reality Check: In this case the sample contains 5  1020 atoms, which is approximately
11000 of a mole. Thus the sample should have a mass of about (11000)(58.93)  0.06.
Our answer of 0.05 makes sense.
See Exercise 3.36.

86

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

3.4

Molar Mass

A chemical compound is, ultimately, a collection of atoms. For example, methane (the
major component of natural gas) consists of molecules that each contain one carbon and
four hydrogen atoms (CH4). How can we calculate the mass of 1 mole of methane; that
is, what is the mass of 6.022  1023 CH4 molecules? Since each CH4 molecule contains
one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms, 1 mole of CH4 molecules contains 1 mole of
carbon atoms and 4 moles of hydrogen atoms. The mass of 1 mole of methane can be
found by summing the masses of carbon and hydrogen present:
Mass of 1 mol C 
12.01 g
Mass of 4 mol H  4  1.008 g
Mass of 1 mol CH4 
16.04 g

In this case, the term 12.01 limits the
number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures.

A substance’s molar mass is the mass in
grams of 1 mole of the substance.

Sample Exercise 3.6

Because 16.04 g represents the mass of 1 mole of methane molecules, it makes sense
to call it the molar mass for methane. Thus the molar mass of a substance is the mass in
grams of one mole of the compound. Traditionally, the term molecular weight has been
used for this quantity. However, we will use molar mass exclusively in this text. The molar mass of a known substance is obtained by summing the masses of the component atoms
as we did for methane.

Calculating Molar Mass I
Juglone, a dye known for centuries, is produced from the husks of black walnuts. It is
also a natural herbicide (weed killer) that kills off competitive plants around the black
walnut tree but does not affect grass and other noncompetitive plants. The formula for
juglone is C10H6O3.
a. Calculate the molar mass of juglone.
b. A sample of 1.56  102 g of pure juglone was extracted from black walnut husks.
How many moles of juglone does this sample represent?
Solution
a. The molar mass is obtained by summing the masses of the component atoms. In 1 mole
of juglone there are 10 moles of carbon atoms, 6 moles of hydrogen atoms, and 3 moles
of oxygen atoms:
10 C: 10  12.01 g  120.1 g
6 H:
6  1.008 g  6.048 g
3 O:
3  16.00 g  48.00 g
Mass of 1 mol C10H6O3  174.1 g

Juglone

The mass of 1 mole of juglone is 174.1 g, which is the molar mass.
b. The mass of 1 mole of this compound is 174.1 g; thus 1.56  102 g is much less than
a mole. The exact fraction of a mole can be determined as follows:
1.56  102 g juglone 

1 mol juglone
 8.96  105 mol juglone
174.1 g juglone
See Exercises 3.39 through 3.42.

Sample Exercise 3.7

Calculating Molar Mass II
Calcium carbonate (CaCO3), also called calcite, is the principal mineral found in limestone, marble, chalk, pearls, and the shells of marine animals such as clams.

3.4 Molar Mass

87

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Measuring the Masses of Large Molecules, or
Making Elephants Fly
hen a chemist produces a new molecule, one crucial
property for making a positive identiﬁcation is the
molecule’s mass. There are many ways to determine the molar mass of a compound, but one of the fastest and most accurate methods involves mass spectrometry. This method
requires that the substance be put into the gas phase and ionized. The deﬂection that the resulting ion exhibits as it is accelerated through a magnetic ﬁeld can be used to obtain a
very precise value of its mass. One drawback of this method
is that it is difﬁcult to use with large molecules because they
are difﬁcult to vaporize. That is, substances that contain large
molecules typically have very high boiling points, and these
molecules are often damaged when they are vaporized at
such high temperatures. A case in point involves proteins,
an extremely important class of large biologic molecules that
are quite fragile at high temperatures. Typical methods used
to obtain the masses of protein molecules are slow and
tedious.
Mass spectrometry has not been used previously to obtain protein masses because proteins decompose at the

W

temperatures necessary to vaporize them. However, a new
technique called matrix-assisted laser desorption has been
developed that allows mass spectrometric determination of
protein molar masses. In this technique, the large “target”
molecule is embedded in a matrix of smaller molecules. The
matrix is then placed in a mass spectrometer and blasted
with a laser beam, which causes its disintegration. Disintegration of the matrix frees the large target molecule, which
is then swept into the mass spectrometer. One researcher involved in this project likened this method to an elephant on
top of a tall building: “The elephant must ﬂy if the building
is suddenly turned into ﬁne grains of sand.”
This technique allows scientists to determine the mass
of huge molecules. So far researchers have measured proteins with masses up to 350,000 daltons (1 dalton is the mass
of a hydrogen atom). This method, which makes mass spectrometry a routine tool for the determination of protein
masses, probably will be extended to even larger molecules
such as DNA and could be a revolutionary development in
the characterization of biomolecules.

a. Calculate the molar mass of calcium carbonate.
b. A certain sample of calcium carbonate contains 4.86 moles. What is the mass in grams
of this sample? What is the mass of the CO32 ions present?
Solution
a. Calcium carbonate is an ionic compound composed of Ca2 and CO32 ions. In 1 mole
of calcium carbonate there are 1 mole of Ca2 ions and 1 mole of CO32 ions. The
molar mass is calculated by summing the masses of the components:
1 Ca2:

1  40.08 g  40.08 g

2

1 CO3 :
Calcite crystals.

1 C:

1  12.01 g  12.01 g

3 O:

3  16.00 g  48.00 g

Mass of 1 mol CaCO3  100.09 g
Thus the mass of 1 mole of CaCO3 (1 mol Ca2 plus 1 mol CO32) is 100.09 g. This
is the molar mass.
b. The mass of 1 mole of CaCO3 is 100.09 g. The sample contains nearly 5 moles, or
close to 500 g. The exact amount is determined as follows:
4.86 mol CaCO3 

100.09 g CaCO3
 486 g CaCO3
1 mol CaCO3

88

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
To ﬁnd the mass of carbonate ions (CO32) present in this sample, we must realize that 4.86 moles of CaCO3 contains 4.86 moles of Ca2 ions and 4.86 moles of
CO32 ions. The mass of 1 mole of CO32 ions is
1 C: 1  12.01  12.01 g
3 O: 3  16.00  48.00 g
Mass of 1 mol CO32  60.01 g
Thus the mass of 4.86 moles of CO32 ions is
4.86 mol CO32 

60.01 g CO32
 292 g CO32
1 mol CO32
See Exercises 3.43 through 3.46.

Sample Exercise 3.8

Molar Mass and Numbers of Molecules
Isopentyl acetate (C7H14O2) is the compound responsible for the scent of bananas. A molecular model of isopentyl acetate is shown in the margin below. Interestingly, bees release
about 1 ␮g (1  106 g) of this compound when they sting. The resulting scent attracts
other bees to join the attack. How many molecules of isopentyl acetate are released in a
typical bee sting? How many atoms of carbon are present?
Solution
Since we are given a mass of isopentyl acetate and want to ﬁnd the number of molecules,
we must ﬁrst compute the molar mass:
g
 84.07 g C
mol
g
14 mol H  1.008
 14.11 g H
mol
g
32.00 g O
2 mol O  16.00

mol
130.18 g
7 mol C  12.01

Isopentyl acetate is released when a
bee stings.

This means that 1 mole of isopentyl acetate (6.022  1023 molecules) has a mass of
130.18 g.
To ﬁnd the number of molecules released in a sting, we must ﬁrst determine the number of moles of isopentyl acetate in 1  106 g:
1  106 g C7H14O2 

1 mol C7H14O2
 8  109 mol C7H14O2
130.18 g C7H14O2

Since 1 mole is 6.022  1023 units, we can determine the number of molecules:
Carbon
Oxygen
Hydrogen

8  109 mol C7H14O2 

6.022  1023 molecules
 5  1015 molecules
1 mol C7H14O2

To determine the number of carbon atoms present, we must multiply the number of molecules by 7, since each molecule of isopentyl acetate contains seven carbon atoms:

Isopentyl acetate

To show the correct number of signiﬁcant
ﬁgures in each calculation, we round after each step. In your calculations, always
carry extra signiﬁcant ﬁgures through to
the end; then round.

5  1015 molecules 

7 carbon atoms
 4  1016 carbon atoms
molecule

Note: In keeping with our practice of always showing the correct number of signiﬁcant
ﬁgures, we have rounded after each step. However, if extra digits are carried throughout
this problem, the ﬁnal answer rounds to 3  1016.
See Exercises 3.47 through 3.52.

3.5 Percent Composition of Compounds

3.5

89

Percent Composition of Compounds

There are two common ways of describing the composition of a compound: in terms of
the numbers of its constituent atoms and in terms of the percentages (by mass) of its elements. We can obtain the mass percents of the elements from the formula of the compound by comparing the mass of each element present in 1 mole of the compound to the
total mass of 1 mole of the compound.
For example, for ethanol, which has the formula C2H5OH, the mass of each element
present and the molar mass are obtained as follows:
g
 24.02 g
mol
g
Mass of H  6 mol  1.008
 6.048 g
mol
g
Mass of O  1 mol  16.00
 16.00 g
mol
Mass of 1 mol C2H5OH  46.07 g
Mass of C  2 mol  12.01

The mass percent (often called the weight percent) of carbon in ethanol can be computed
by comparing the mass of carbon in 1 mole of ethanol to the total mass of 1 mole of
ethanol and multiplying the result by 100:
mass of C in 1 mol C2H5OH
 100%
mass of 1 mol C2H5OH
24.02 g

 100%  52.14%
46.07 g

Mass percent of C 

The mass percents of hydrogen and oxygen in ethanol are obtained in a similar manner:
mass of H in 1 mol C2H5OH
 100%
mass of 1 mol C2H5OH
6.048 g

 100%  13.13%
46.07 g
mass of O in 1 mol C2H5OH
Mass percent of O 
 100%
mass of 1 mol C2H5OH
Mass percent of H 



16.00 g
 100%  34.73%
46.07 g

Reality Check: Notice that the percentages add up to 100.00%; this provides a check that
the calculations are correct.

Sample Exercise 3.9

Calculating Mass Percent I
Carvone is a substance that occurs in two forms having different arrangements of the atoms
but the same molecular formula (C10H14O) and mass. One type of carvone gives caraway
seeds their characteristic smell, and the other type is responsible for the smell of spearmint
oil. Compute the mass percent of each element in carvone.
Solution
The masses of the elements in 1 mole of carvone are
Mass of C in 1 mol  10 mol  12.01

g
 120.1 g
mol

90

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
g
 14.11 g
mol
g
Mass of O in 1 mol  1 mol  16.00
 16.00 g
mol
Mass of 1 mol C10H14O  150.2 g

Mass of H in 1 mol  14 mol  1.008

Next we ﬁnd the fraction of the total mass contributed by each element and convert
it to a percentage:
120.1 g C
 100%  79.96%
150.2 g C10H14O
14.11 g H
Mass percent of H 
 100%  9.394%
150.2 g C10H14O
16.00 g O
Mass percent of O 
 100%  10.65%
150.2 g C10H14O
Mass percent of C 

Carvone

Reality Check: Sum the individual mass percent values—they should total to 100% within
round-off errors. In this case, the percentages add up to 100.00%.
See Exercises 3.59 and 3.60.
Sample Exercise 3.10
Although Fleming is commonly given
credit for the discovery of penicillin, there
is good evidence that penicillium mold extracts were used in the nineteenth century
by Lord Joseph Lister to cure infections.

Calculating Mass Percent II
Penicillin, the ﬁrst of a now large number of antibiotics (antibacterial agents), was discovered accidentally by the Scottish bacteriologist Alexander Fleming in 1928, but he was
never able to isolate it as a pure compound. This and similar antibiotics have saved millions of lives that might have been lost to infections. Penicillin F has the formula
C14H20N2SO4. Compute the mass percent of each element.
Solution
The molar mass of penicillin F is computed as follows:
g

mol
g
H: 20 mol  1.008

mol
g
N:
2 mol  14.01

mol
g
S:
1 mol  32.07

mol
g
O:
4 mol  16.00

mol
Mass of 1 mol C14H20N2SO4 
C:

14 mol  12.01

Mass percent of C 

168.1 g
120.16 g
28.02 g
32.07 g
64.00 g
312.4 g

168.1 g C
 100%  53.81%
312.4 g C14H20N2SO4

20.16 g H
 100%  6.453%
312.4 g C14H20N2SO4
28.02 g N
Mass percent of N 
 100%  8.969%
312.4 g C14H20N2SO4
Mass percent of H 

Penicillin is isolated from a mold that can
be grown in large quantities in fermentation tanks.

Mass percent of S 

32.07 g S
 100%  10.27%
312.4 g C14H20N2SO4

3.6 Determining the Formula of a Compound

Mass percent of O 

91

64.00 g O
 100%  20.49%
312.4 g C14H20N2SO4

Reality Check: The percentages add up to 99.99%.
See Exercises 3.61 and 3.62.

3.6

Determining the Formula of a Compound

When a new compound is prepared, one of the ﬁrst items of interest is the formula of the
compound. This is most often determined by taking a weighed sample of the compound
and either decomposing it into its component elements or reacting it with oxygen to produce substances such as CO2, H2O, and N2, which are then collected and weighed. A
device for doing this type of analysis is shown in Fig. 3.5. The results of such analyses
provide the mass of each type of element in the compound, which can be used to determine
the mass percent of each element.
We will see how information of this type can be used to compute the formula of a
compound. Suppose a substance has been prepared that is composed of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen. When 0.1156 gram of this compound is reacted with oxygen, 0.1638
gram of carbon dioxide (CO2) and 0.1676 gram of water (H2O) are collected. Assuming
that all the carbon in the compound is converted to CO2, we can determine the mass of
carbon originally present in the 0.1156-gram sample. To do this, we must use the fraction
(by mass) of carbon in CO2. The molar mass of CO2 is
C:
O:

g
 12.01 g
mol
g
2 mol  16.00
 32.00 g
mol
Molar mass of CO2  44.01 g/mol
1 mol  12.01

The fraction of carbon present by mass is
CO2

12.01 g C
Mass of C

Total mass of CO2
44.01 g CO2
This factor can now be used to determine the mass of carbon in 0.1638 gram of CO2:
0.1638 g CO2 

H2O

12.01 g C
 0.04470 g C
44.01 g CO2

Remember that this carbon originally came from the 0.1156-gram sample of unknown
compound. Thus the mass percent of carbon in this compound is
0.04470 g C
 100%  38.67% C
0.1156 g compound
Furnace

O2

CO2, H2O, O2, and other gases

Sample
H2O absorber
such as Mg(ClO4)2

O2 and
other gases

CO2 absorber
such as NaOH

FIGURE 3.5
A schematic diagram of the combustion device used to analyze substances for carbon and hydrogen. The
sample is burned in the presence of excess oxygen, which converts all its carbon to carbon dioxide and
all its hydrogen to water. These products are collected by absorption using appropriate materials, and
their amounts are determined by measuring the increase in masses of the absorbents.

92

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
The same procedure can be used to ﬁnd the mass percent of hydrogen in the unknown
compound. We assume that all the hydrogen present in the original 0.1156 gram of compound was converted to H2O. The molar mass of H2O is 18.02 grams, and the fraction of
hydrogen by mass in H2O is
2.016 g H
Mass of H

Mass of H2O
18.02 g H2O
Therefore, the mass of hydrogen in 0.1676 gram of H2O is
2.016 g H
 0.01875 g H
18.02 g H2O

0.1676 g H2O 

The mass percent of hydrogen in the compound is
0.01875 g H
 100%  16.22% H
0.1156 g compound
The unknown compound contains only carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen. So far we have determined that it is 38.67% carbon and 16.22% hydrogen. The remainder must be nitrogen:
100.00%  138.67%  16.22%2  45.11% N
h
%C

h
%H

We have determined that the compound contains 38.67% carbon, 16.22% hydrogen, and
45.11% nitrogen. Next we use these data to obtain the formula.
Since the formula of a compound indicates the numbers of atoms in the compound,
we must convert the masses of the elements to numbers of atoms. The easiest way to do
this is to work with 100.00 grams of the compound. In the present case, 38.67% carbon
by mass means 38.67 grams of carbon per 100.00 grams of compound; 16.22% hydrogen
means 16.22 grams of hydrogen per 100.00 grams of compound; and so on. To determine
the formula, we must calculate the number of carbon atoms in 38.67 grams of carbon, the
number of hydrogen atoms in 16.22 grams of hydrogen, and the number of nitrogen atoms
in 45.11 grams of nitrogen. We can do this as follows:
1 mol C
 3.220 mol C
12.01 g C
1 mol H
16.22 g H 
 16.09 mol H
1.008 g H
38.67 g C 

45.11 g N 

1 mol N
 3.219 mol N
14.01 g N

Thus 100.00 grams of this compound contains 3.220 moles of carbon atoms, 16.09 moles
of hydrogen atoms, and 3.219 moles of nitrogen atoms.
We can ﬁnd the smallest whole-number ratio of atoms in this compound by dividing
each of the mole values above by the smallest of the three:
C:
H:
N:

3.220
 1.000  1
3.220
16.09
 4.997  5
3.220
3.219
 1.000  1
3.220

Thus the formula might well be CH5N. However, it also could be C2H10N2 or C3H15N3,
and so on—that is, some multiple of the smallest whole-number ratio. Each of these alternatives also has the correct relative numbers of atoms. That is, any molecule that can

3.6 Determining the Formula of a Compound

FIGURE 3.6
Examples of substances whose empirical
and molecular formulas differ. Notice that
molecular formula  (empirical formula)n,
where n is an integer.

Molecular formula  (empirical formula)n,
where n is an integer.

C6H6 = (CH)6

S8 = (S)8

93

C6H12O6 = (CH2O)6

be represented as (CH5N)n, where n is an integer, has the empirical formula CH5N. To
be able to specify the exact formula of the molecule involved, the molecular formula,
we must know the molar mass.
Suppose we know that this compound with empirical formula CH5N has a molar mass
of 31.06 g/mol. How do we determine which of the possible choices represents the molecular formula? Since the molecular formula is always a whole number multiple of the
empirical formula, we must ﬁrst ﬁnd the empirical formula mass for CH5N:
1 C: 1  12.01 g  12.01 g
5 H: 5  1.008 g  5.040 g
1 N: 1  14.01 g  14.01 g
Formula mass of CH5N  31.06 g/mol
This is the same as the known molar mass of the compound. Thus in this case the empirical
formula and the molecular formula are the same; this substance consists of molecules with
the formula CH5N. It is quite common for the empirical and molecular formulas to be
different; some examples where this is the case are shown in Fig. 3.6.

Sample Exercise 3.11

Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas I
Determine the empirical and molecular formulas for a compound that gives the following
percentages upon analysis (in mass percents):
71.65% Cl

24.27% C

4.07% H

The molar mass is known to be 98.96 g/mol.
Solution
First, we convert the mass percents to masses in grams. In 100.00 g of this compound
there are 71.65 g of chlorine, 24.27 g of carbon, and 4.07 g of hydrogen. We use these
masses to compute the moles of atoms present:
1 mol Cl
 2.021 mol Cl
35.45 g Cl
1 mol C
24.27 g C 
 2.021 mol C
12.01 g C
1 mol H
4.07 g H 
 4.04 mol H
1.008 g H

71.65 g Cl 

Dividing each mole value by 2.021 (the smallest number of moles present), we obtain the
empirical formula ClCH2.

94

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
To determine the molecular formula, we must compare the empirical formula mass
with the molar mass. The empirical formula mass is 49.48 g/mol (conﬁrm this). The molar mass is known to be 98.96 g/mol.
98.96 g/mol
Molar mass

2
Empirical formula mass
49.48 g/mol
Molecular formula  1ClCH2 2 2  Cl2C2H4

FIGURE 3.7
The two forms of dichloroethane.

This substance is composed of molecules with the formula Cl2C2H4.
Notice that the method we employ here allows us to determine the molecular formula
of a compound but not its structural formula. The compound Cl2C2H4 is called
dichloroethane. There are two forms of this compound, shown in Fig. 3.7. The form on
the right was formerly used as an additive in leaded gasoline.
See Exercises 3.57 and 3.58.

Sample Exercise 3.12

Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas II
A white powder is analyzed and found to contain 43.64% phosphorus and 56.36% oxygen by mass. The compound has a molar mass of 283.88 g/mol. What are the compound’s
empirical and molecular formulas?
Solution
In 100.00 g of this compound there are 43.64 g of phosphorus and 56.36 g of oxygen. In
terms of moles, in 100.00 g of the compound we have
1 mol P
 1.409 mol P
30.97 g P
1 mol O
56.36 g O 
 3.523 mol O
16.00 g O
43.64 g P 

Dividing both mole values by the smaller one gives
1.409
1P
1.409

and

3.523
 2.5 O
1.409

This yields the formula PO2.5. Since compounds must contain whole numbers of atoms,
the empirical formula should contain only whole numbers. To obtain the simplest
set of whole numbers, we multiply both numbers by 2 to give the empirical formula P2O5.
To obtain the molecular formula, we must compare the empirical formula mass to the
molar mass. The empirical formula mass for P2O5 is 141.94.
FIGURE 3.8
The structure of P4O10. Note that some of
the oxygen atoms act as “bridges” between
the phosphorus atoms. This compound has
a great afﬁnity for water and is often used
as a desiccant, or drying agent.

Molar mass
283.88

2
Empirical formula mass
141.94
The molecular formula is (P2O5)2, or P4O10.
The structural formula of this interesting compound is given in Fig. 3.8.
See Exercise 3.59.

In Sample Exercises 3.11 and 3.12 we found the molecular formula by comparing
the empirical formula mass with the molar mass. There is an alternate way to obtain the
molecular formula. For example, in Sample Exercise 3.11 we know the molar mass of the
compound is 98.96 g/mol. This means that 1 mole of the compound weighs 98.96 grams.

3.6 Determining the Formula of a Compound

95

Since we also know the mass percentages of each element, we can compute the mass of
each element present in 1 mole of compound:
Chlorine:
Carbon:
Hydrogen:

71.65 g Cl
98.96 g
70.90 g Cl


100.0 g compound
mol
mol compound
24.27 g C
98.96 g
24.02 g C


100.0 g compound
mol
mol compound
4.07 g H
98.96 g
4.03 g H


100.0 g compound
mol
mol compound

Now we can compute moles of atoms present per mole of compound:
Chlorine:
Carbon:
Hydrogen:

70.90 g Cl
1 mol Cl
2.000 mol Cl


mol compound
35.45 g Cl
mol compound
24.02 g C
1 mol C
2.000 mol C


mol compound
12.01 g C
mol compound
4.03 g H
1 mol H
4.00 mol H


mol compound
1.008 g H
mol compound

Thus 1 mole of the compound contains 2 mol Cl atoms, 2 mol C atoms, and 4 mol H
atoms, and the molecular formula is Cl2C2H4, as obtained in Sample Exercise 3.11.
Sample Exercise 3.13

Determining a Molecular Formula
Caffeine, a stimulant found in coffee, tea, and chocolate, contains 49.48% carbon, 5.15% hydrogen, 28.87% nitrogen, and 16.49% oxygen by mass and has a molar mass of 194.2 g/mol.
Determine the molecular formula of caffeine.
Solution
We will ﬁrst determine the mass of each element in 1 mole (194.2 g) of caffeine:
49.48 g C
100.0 g caffeine
5.15 g H
100.0 g caffeine
28.87 g N
100.0 g caffeine
16.49 g O
100.0 g caffeine

Computer-generated molecule of caffeine.

194.2 g
mol
194.2 g

mol
194.2 g

mol
194.2 g

mol


96.09 g C
mol caffeine
10.0 g H

mol caffeine
56.07 g N

mol caffeine
32.02 g O

mol caffeine


Now we will convert to moles:
Carbon:
Hydrogen:
Nitrogen:
Oxygen:

96.09 g C
1 mol C

mol caffeine
12.01 g C
10.0 g H
1 mol H

mol caffeine
1.008 g H
56.07 g N
1 mol N

mol caffeine
14.01 g N
32.02 g O
1 mol O

mol caffeine
16.00 g O

8.001 mol C
mol caffeine
9.92 mol H

mol caffeine
4.002 mol N

mol caffeine
2.001 mol O

mol caffeine


Rounding the numbers to integers gives the molecular formula for caffeine: C8H10N4O2.
See Exercise 3.76.

96

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
The methods for obtaining empirical and molecular formulas are summarized as
follows:

Empirical Formula Determination

Numbers very close to whole numbers,
such as 9.92 and 1.08, should be
rounded to whole numbers. Numbers
such as 2.25, 4.33, and 2.72 should not
be rounded to whole numbers.

䊉

Since mass percentage gives the number of grams of a particular element per 100 grams
of compound, base the calculation on 100 grams of compound. Each percent will then
represent the mass in grams of that element.

䊉

Determine the number of moles of each element present in 100 grams of compound
using the atomic masses of the elements present.

䊉

Divide each value of the number of moles by the smallest of the values. If each resulting
number is a whole number (after appropriate rounding), these numbers represent the
subscripts of the elements in the empirical formula.

䊉

If the numbers obtained in the previous step are not whole numbers, multiply each
number by an integer so that the results are all whole numbers.

Molecular Formula Determination
Method One
䊉

Obtain the empirical formula.

䊉

Compute the mass corresponding to the empirical formula.

䊉

Calculate the ratio
Molar mass
Empirical formula mass

䊉

The integer from the previous step represents the number of empirical formula units
in one molecule. When the empirical formula subscripts are multiplied by this integer, the molecular formula results. This procedure is summarized by the equation:
Molecular formula  1empirical formula2 

Note that method two assumes that the
molar mass of the compound is known
accurately.

molar mass
empirical formula mass

Method Two
䊉

Using the mass percentages and the molar mass, determine the mass of each element
present in one mole of compound.

䊉

Determine the number of moles of each element present in one mole of compound.

䊉

The integers from the previous step represent the subscripts in the molecular formula.

3.7

Chemical Equations

Chemical Reactions
A chemical change involves a reorganization of the atoms in one or more substances. For
example, when the methane (CH4) in natural gas combines with oxygen (O2) in the air
and burns, carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) are formed. This process is represented

3.7 Chemical Equations

97

by a chemical equation with the reactants (here methane and oxygen) on the left side
of an arrow and the products (carbon dioxide and water) on the right side:
CH4  O2 ¡ CO2  H2O
Reactants

Products

Notice that the atoms have been reorganized. Bonds have been broken, and new ones have
been formed. It is important to recognize that in a chemical reaction, atoms are neither
created nor destroyed. All atoms present in the reactants must be accounted for among
the products. In other words, there must be the same number of each type of atom on the
product side and on the reactant side of the arrow. Making sure that this rule is obeyed is
called balancing a chemical equation for a reaction.
The equation (shown above) for the reaction between CH4 and O2 is not balanced.
We can see this from the following representation of the reaction:

+

+

Notice that the number of oxygen atoms (in O2) on the left of the arrow is two, while on
the right there are three O atoms (in CO2 and H2O). Also, there are four hydrogen atoms
(in CH4) on the left and only two (in H2O) on the right. Remember that a chemical reaction is simply a rearrangement of the atoms (a change in the way they are organized).
Atoms are not created or destroyed in a chemical reaction. Thus the reactants and products must occur in numbers that give the same number of each type of atom among both
the reactants and products. Simple trial and error will allow us to ﬁgure this out for the
reaction of methane with oxygen. The needed numbers of molecules are

+

+

Notice that now we have the same number of each type of atom represented among the
reactants and the products.
We can represent the preceding situation in a shorthand manner by the following
chemical equation:
CH4  2O2 ¡ CO2  2H2O
We can check that the equation is balanced by comparing the number of each type of atom
on both sides:

4O

Methane reacts with oxygen to produce the
ﬂame in a Bunsen burner.

To summarize, we have
Reactants

Products

1C
4H
4O

1C
4H
4O

1C

2O

88n

4H

88n

1C

88n

CH4  2O2 ¡ CO2  2H2O
p h
h
h

4H
2O

98

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

TABLE 3.2

Information Conveyed by the Balanced Equation for the Combustion of Methane
Reactants

Products

CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2
1 molecule  2 molecules

¡

CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2

¡

1 molecule  2 molecules

1 mole  2 moles

¡

16 g  2 132 g2

¡

6.022  1023 molecules  2 16.022  1023 molecules2
80 g reactants

1 mole  2 moles

6.022  1023 molecules  2 16.022  1023 molecules2

¡

44 g  2 118 g2

80 g products

The Meaning of a Chemical Equation
Visualization: Oxygen,
Hydrogen, Soap Bubbles,
and Balloons

The chemical equation for a reaction gives two important types of information: the nature
of the reactants and products and the relative numbers of each.
The reactants and products in a speciﬁc reaction must be identiﬁed by experiment.
Besides specifying the compounds involved in the reaction, the equation often gives the
physical states of the reactants and products:
State

Symbol

Solid
Liquid
Gas
Dissolved in water (in aqueous solution)

(s)
(l)
(g)
(aq)

For example, when hydrochloric acid in aqueous solution is added to solid sodium hydrogen carbonate, the products carbon dioxide gas, liquid water, and sodium chloride
(which dissolves in the water) are formed:
HCl1aq2  NaHCO3 1s2 ¡ CO2 1g2  H2O1l2  NaCl1aq2
The relative numbers of reactants and products in a reaction are indicated by the coefﬁcients in the balanced equation. (The coefﬁcients can be determined because we know
that the same number of each type of atom must occur on both sides of the equation.) For
example, the balanced equation
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2

Hydrochloric acid reacts with solid sodium
hydrogen carbonate to produce gaseous
carbon dioxide.

can be interpreted in several equivalent ways, as shown in Table 3.2. Note that the total
mass is 80 grams for both reactants and products. We expect the mass to remain constant,
since chemical reactions involve only a rearrangement of atoms. Atoms, and therefore
mass, are conserved in a chemical reaction.
From this discussion you can see that a balanced chemical equation gives you a great
deal of information.

3.8

Visualization: Conservation
of Mass and Balancing
Equations

Balancing Chemical Equations

An unbalanced chemical equation is of limited use. Whenever you see an equation, you should
ask yourself whether it is balanced. The principle that lies at the heart of the balancing process
is that atoms are conserved in a chemical reaction. The same number of each type of atom
must be found among the reactants and products. It is also important to recognize that the
identities of the reactants and products of a reaction are determined by experimental observation. For example, when liquid ethanol is burned in the presence of sufﬁcient oxygen gas,
the products are always carbon dioxide and water. When the equation for this reaction is

3.8 Balancing Chemical Equations

In balancing equations, start with the
most complicated molecule.

99

balanced, the identities of the reactants and products must not be changed. The formulas of
the compounds must never be changed in balancing a chemical equation. That is, the subscripts
in a formula cannot be changed, nor can atoms be added or subtracted from a formula.
Most chemical equations can be balanced by inspection, that is, by trial and error. It
is always best to start with the most complicated molecules (those containing the greatest number of atoms). For example, consider the reaction of ethanol with oxygen, given
by the unbalanced equation
C2H5OH1l2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  H2O1g2
which can be represented by the following molecular models:

+

+

Notice that the carbon and hydrogen atoms are not balanced. There are two carbon atoms on
the left and one on the right, and there are six hydrogens on the left and two on the right.
We need to ﬁnd the correct numbers of reactants and products so that we have the same
number of all types of atoms among the reactants and products. We will balance the
equation “by inspection” (a systematic trial-and-error procedure).
The most complicated molecule here is C2H5OH. We will begin by balancing the
products that contain the atoms in C2H5OH. Since C2H5OH contains two carbon atoms,
we place the coefﬁcient 2 before the CO2 to balance the carbon atoms:

Since C2H5OH contains six hydrogen atoms, the hydrogen atoms can be balanced by
placing a 3 before the H2O:

Last, we balance the oxygen atoms. Note that the right side of the preceding equation contains seven oxygen atoms, whereas the left side has only three. We can correct this by
putting a 3 before the O2 to produce the balanced equation:

Now we check:

The equation is balanced.
The balanced equation can be represented as follows:

+

+

100

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
You can see that all the elements balance.

Writing and Balancing the Equation for a Chemical Reaction

➥1
➥2
➥3

Sample Exercise 3.14

Chromate and dichromate compounds
are carcinogens (cancer-inducing agents)
and should be handled very carefully.

Determine what reaction is occurring. What are the reactants, the products, and
the physical states involved?
Write the unbalanced equation that summarizes the reaction described in step 1.
Balance the equation by inspection, starting with the most complicated molecule(s). Determine what coefﬁcients are necessary so that the same number of
each type of atom appears on both reactant and product sides. Do not change
the identities (formulas) of any of the reactants or products.

Balancing a Chemical Equation I
Chromium compounds exhibit a variety of bright colors. When solid ammonium dichromate, (NH4)2Cr2O7, a vivid orange compound, is ignited, a spectacular reaction occurs,
as shown in the two photographs on the next page. Although the reaction is actually
somewhat more complex, let’s assume here that the products are solid chromium(III)
oxide, nitrogen gas (consisting of N2 molecules), and water vapor. Balance the equation
for this reaction.
Solution

➥

1 From the description given, the reactant is solid ammonium dichromate,
(NH 4) 2Cr 2O 7 (s), and the products are nitrogen gas, N 2(g), water vapor, H 2O(g),
and solid chromium(III) oxide, Cr 2O 3(s). The formula for chromium(III) oxide can
be determined by recognizing that the Roman numeral III means that Cr3 ions are
present. For a neutral compound, the formula must then be Cr2O3, since each oxide ion
is O2.

➥2

The unbalanced equation is
1NH4 2 2Cr2O7 1s2 S Cr2O3 1s2  N2 1g2  H2O1g2

➥ 3 Note that nitrogen and chromium are balanced (two nitrogen atoms and two
chromium atoms on each side), but hydrogen and oxygen are not. A coefﬁcient of 4 for
H2O balances the hydrogen atoms:
1NH4 2 2Cr2O7 1s2 S Cr2O3 1s2  N2 1g2  4H2O1g2

(4  2) H

(4  2) H

Note that in balancing the hydrogen we also have balanced the oxygen, since there are
seven oxygen atoms in the reactants and in the products.
Reality Check:
2 N, 8 H, 2 Cr, 7 O S 2 N, 8 H, 2 Cr, 7 O
Reactant
atoms

Product
atoms

The equation is balanced.
See Exercises 3.81 and 3.82.

3.8 Balancing Chemical Equations

101

Decomposition of ammonium dichromate.

Sample Exercise 3.15
The Ostwald process is described in
Section 20.2.

Balancing a Chemical Equation II
At 1000C, ammonia gas, NH3(g), reacts with oxygen gas to form gaseous nitric oxide,
NO(g), and water vapor. This reaction is the ﬁrst step in the commercial production of
nitric acid by the Ostwald process. Balance the equation for this reaction.
Solution
The unbalanced equation for the reaction is
NH3 1g2  O2 1g2 S NO1g2  H2O1g2
Because all the molecules in this equation are of about equal complexity, where we
start in balancing it is rather arbitrary. Let’s begin by balancing the hydrogen. A
coefﬁcient of 2 for NH3 and a coefﬁcient of 3 for H2O give six atoms of hydrogen on
both sides:
2NH3 1g2  O2 1g2 S NO1g2  3H2O1g2
The nitrogen can be balanced with a coefﬁcient of 2 for NO:
2NH3 1g2  O2 1g2 S 2NO1g2  3H2O1g2
Finally, note that there are two atoms of oxygen on the left and ﬁve on the right. The
oxygen can be balanced with a coefﬁcient of 52 for O2:
2NH3 1g2 

5
O 1g2 S 2NO1g2  3H2O1g2
2 2

However, the usual custom is to have whole-number coefﬁcients. We simply multiply the
entire equation by 2.
4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 S 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2
Reality Check: There are 4 N, 12 H, and 10 O on both sides, so the equation is balanced.

102

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
We can represent this balanced equation visually as

+

+

See Exercises 3.83 through 3.88.

3.9

Before doing any calculations involving a
chemical reaction, be sure the equation
for the reaction is balanced.

Stoichiometric Calculations: Amounts of
Reactants and Products

As we have seen in previous sections of this chapter, the coefﬁcients in chemical equations represent numbers of molecules, not masses of molecules. However, when a reaction is to be run in a laboratory or chemical plant, the amounts of substances needed cannot
be determined by counting molecules directly. Counting is always done by weighing. In
this section we will see how chemical equations can be used to determine the masses of
reacting chemicals.
To develop the principles for dealing with the stoichiometry of reactions, we will consider the reaction of propane with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water. We will
consider the question: “What mass of oxygen will react with 96.1 grams of propane?” In
doing stoichiometry, the ﬁrst thing we must do is write the balanced chemical equation
for the reaction. In this case the balanced equation is
C3H8 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 3CO2 1g2  4H2O1g2
which can be visualized as

+

+

This equation means that 1 mole of C3H8 reacts with 5 moles of O2 to produce 3 moles
of CO2 and 4 moles of H2O. To use this equation to ﬁnd the masses of reactants and products, we must be able to convert between masses and moles of substances. Thus we must
ﬁrst ask: “How many moles of propane are present in 96.1 grams of propane?” The molar

3.9 Stoichiometric Calculations: Amounts of Reactants and Products

103

CHEMICAL IMPACT
High Mountains—Low Octane
he next time that you visit a gas station, take a moment to
note the octane rating that accompanies the grade of gasoline that you are purchasing. The gasoline is priced according
to its octane rating—a measure of the fuel’s antiknock properties. In a conventional internal combustion engine, gasoline
vapors and air are drawn into the combustion cylinder on the
downward stroke of the piston. This air–fuel mixture is compressed on the upward piston stroke (compression stroke), and
a spark from the sparkplug ignites the mix. The rhythmic combustion of the air–fuel mix occurring sequentially in several
cylinders furnishes the power to propel the vehicle down the
road. Excessive heat and pressure (or poor-quality fuel) within
the cylinder may cause the premature combustion of the mixture—commonly known as engine “knock” or “ping.” Over
time, this engine knock can damage the engine, resulting in
inefﬁcient performance and costly repairs.
A consumer typically is faced with three choices of
gasoline, with octane ratings of 87 (regular), 89 (midgrade),
and 93 (premium). But if you happen to travel or live in the

T

higher elevations of the Rocky Mountain states, you might
be surprised to ﬁnd different octane ratings at the gasoline
pumps. The reason for this provides a lesson in stoichiometry. At higher elevations the air is less dense—the volume
of oxygen per unit volume of air is smaller. Most engines
are designed to achieve a 14:1 oxygen-to-fuel ratio in the
cylinder prior to combustion. If less oxygen is available, then
less fuel is required to achieve this optimal ratio. In turn, the
lower volumes of oxygen and fuel result in a lower pressure
in the cylinder. Because high pressure tends to promote
knocking, the lower pressure within engine cylinders at
higher elevations promotes a more controlled combustion of
the air–fuel mixture, and therefore, octane requirements are
lower. While consumers in the Rocky Mountain states can
purchase three grades of gasoline, the octane ratings of these
fuel blends are different from those in the rest of the United
States. In Denver, Colorado, regular gasoline is 85 octane,
midgrade is 87 octane, and premium is 91 octane—2 points
lower than gasoline sold in most of the rest of the country.

mass of propane to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures is 44.1 (that is, 3  12.01  8  1.008). The
moles of propane can be calculated as follows:
96.1 g C3H8 

1 mol C3H8
 2.18 mol C3H8
44.1 g C3H8

Next we must take into account the fact that each mole of propane reacts with 5 moles
of oxygen. The best way to do this is to use the balanced equation to construct a mole
ratio. In this case we want to convert from moles of propane to moles of oxygen. From
the balanced equation we see that 5 moles of O2 is required for each mole of C3H8, so the
appropriate ratio is
5 mol O2
1 mol C3H8
Multiplying the number of moles of C3H8 by this factor gives the number of moles of O2
required:
2.18 mol C3H8 

5 mol O2
 10.9 mol O2
1 mol C3H8

Notice that the mole ratio is set up so that the moles of C3H8 cancel out, and the units
that result are moles of O2.
Since the original question asked for the mass of oxygen needed to react with
96.1 grams of propane, the 10.9 moles of O2 must be converted to grams. Since the molar
mass of O2 is 32.0 g/mol,
10.9 mol O2 

32.0 g O2
 349 g O2
1 mol O2

Therefore, 349 grams of oxygen is required to burn 96.1 grams of propane.

104

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
This example can be extended by asking: “What mass of carbon dioxide is produced
when 96.1 grams of propane is combusted with oxygen?” In this case we must convert between
moles of propane and moles of carbon dioxide. This can be accomplished by looking at the
balanced equation, which shows that 3 moles of CO2 is produced for each mole of C3H8 reacted. The mole ratio needed to convert from moles of propane to moles of carbon dioxide is
3 mol CO2
1 mol C3H8
The conversion is
2.18 mol C3H8 

3 mol CO2
 6.54 mol CO2
1 mol C3H8

Then, using the molar mass of CO2 (44.0 g/mol), we calculate the mass of CO2 produced:
6.54 mol CO2 

44.0 g CO2
 288 g CO2
1 mol CO2

We will now summarize the sequence of steps needed to carry out stoichiometric calculations.

96.1 g C3H8

1 mol C3H8
44.1 g C3H8

2.18 mol C3H8

44.0 g CO2
1 mol CO2

3 mol CO2
1 mol C3H8

6.54 mol CO2

288 g CO2

Calculating Masses of Reactants and Products in Chemical Reactions

➥1
➥2
➥3
➥4
➥5

Balance the equation for the reaction.
Convert the known mass of the reactant or product to moles of that substance.
Use the balanced equation to set up the appropriate mole ratios.
Use the appropriate mole ratios to calculate the number of moles of the desired
reactant or product.
Convert from moles back to grams if required by the problem.

These steps are summarized by the following diagram:

Balanced chemical
equation
Find appropriate
mole ratio
Moles desired substance
Moles known substance

Mass of
known substance

Mass of desired
substance

Convert
to moles
Moles of
known substance

Convert
to grams
Use mole ratio
to convert

Moles of desired
substance

3.9 Stoichiometric Calculations: Amounts of Reactants and Products

Sample Exercise 3.16

105

Chemical Stoichiometry I
Solid lithium hydroxide is used in space vehicles to remove exhaled carbon dioxide from
the living environment by forming solid lithium carbonate and liquid water. What mass
of gaseous carbon dioxide can be absorbed by 1.00 kg of lithium hydroxide?
Solution

➥1

Using the description of the reaction, we can write the unbalanced equation:
LiOH1s2  CO2 1g2 ¡ Li2CO3 1s2  H2O1l2

The balanced equation is
2LiOH1s2  CO2 1g2 ¡ Li2CO3 1s2  H2O1l2

➥ 2 We convert the given mass of LiOH to moles, using the molar mass of LiOH
(6.941  16.00  1.008  23.95 g/mol):
1.00 kg LiOH 

1000 g LiOH
1 mol LiOH

 41.8 mol LiOH
1 kg LiOH
23.95 g LiOH

➥ 3 Since we want to determine the amount of CO2 that reacts with the given amount
of LiOH, the appropriate mole ratio is
1 mol CO2
2 mol LiOH
Astronaut Sidney M. Gutierrez changes the
lithium hydroxide cannisters on space
shuttle Columbia. The lithium hydroxide is
used to purge carbon dioxide from the air
in the shuttle’s cabin.

➥4

We calculate the moles of CO2 needed to react with the given mass of LiOH using
this mole ratio:
41.8 mol LiOH 

➥5

1 mol CO2
 20.9 mol CO2
2 mol LiOH

Next we calculate the mass of CO2, using its molar mass (44.0 g/mol):
20.9 mol CO2 

44.0 g CO2
 9.20  102 g CO2
1 mol CO2

Thus 920. g of CO2(g) will be absorbed by 1.00 kg of LiOH(s).
See Exercises 3.89 and 3.90.
Sample Exercise 3.17

Chemical Stoichiometry II
Baking soda (NaHCO3) is often used as an antacid. It neutralizes excess hydrochloric acid
secreted by the stomach:
NaHCO3 1s2  HCl1aq2 ¡ NaCl1aq2  H2O1l2  CO2 1aq2
Milk of magnesia, which is an aqueous suspension of magnesium hydroxide, is also used
as an antacid:
Mg1OH2 2 1s2  2HCl1aq2 ¡ 2H2O1l2  MgCl2 1aq2
Which is the more effective antacid per gram, NaHCO3 or Mg(OH)2?
Solution
To answer the question, we must determine the amount of HCl neutralized per gram of
NaHCO3 and per gram of Mg(OH)2. Using the molar mass of NaHCO3 (84.01 g/mol), we
can determine the moles of NaHCO3 in 1.00 g of NaHCO3:
1.00 g NaHCO3 

1 mol NaHCO3
 1.19  102 mol NaHCO3
84.01 g NaHCO3

106

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
Next we determine the moles of HCl using the mole ratio 1 mol HCl/1 mol NaHCO3:
1.19  102 mol NaHCO3 

1 mol HCl
 1.19  102 mol HCl
1 mol NaHCO3

Thus 1.00 g of NaHCO3 will neutralize 1.19  102 mol HCl.
Using the molar mass of Mg(OH)2 (58.32 g/mol), we determine the moles of Mg(OH)2
in 1.00 g:
1.00 g Mg1OH2 2 

1 mol Mg1OH2 2
 1.71  102 mol Mg1OH2 2
58.32 g Mg1OH2 2

To determine the moles of HCl that will react with this amount of Mg(OH)2, we use the
mole ratio 2 mol HCl/1 mol Mg(OH)2:
1.71  102 mol Mg1OH2 2 
Milk of magnesia contains a suspension of
Mg(OH)2(s).

2 mol HCl
 3.42  102 mol HCl
1 mol Mg1OH2 2

Thus 1.00 g of Mg(OH)2 will neutralize 3.42  102 mol HCl. It is a better antacid per
gram than NaHCO3.
See Exercises 3.91 and 3.92.

3.10

The details of the Haber process are
discussed in Section 19.2.

Calculations Involving a Limiting Reactant

When chemicals are mixed together to undergo a reaction, they are often mixed in stoichiometric quantities, that is, in exactly the correct amounts so that all reactants “run
out” (are used up) at the same time. To clarify this concept, let’s consider the production
of hydrogen for use in the manufacture of ammonia by the Haber process. Ammonia, a
very important fertilizer itself and a starting material for other fertilizers, is made by combining nitrogen (from the air) with hydrogen according to the equation
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2

Hydrogen can be obtained from the reaction of methane with water vapor:
CH4 1g2  H2O1g2 ¡ 3H2 1g2  CO1g2

Visualization: Limiting Reactant

We can illustrate what we mean by stoichiometric quantities by ﬁrst visualizing the
balanced equation as follows:

+

+

Since this reaction involves one molecule of methane reacting with one molecule of water, to have stoichiometric amounts of methane and water we must have equal numbers
of them, as shown in Fig. 3.9, where several stoichiometric mixtures are shown.
Suppose we want to calculate the mass of water required to react exactly with
2.50  103 kilograms of methane. That is, how much water will just consume all the
2.50  103 kilograms of methane, leaving no methane or water remaining?
To do this calculation, we need to recognize that we need equal numbers of methane
and water molecules. Therefore, we ﬁrst need to ﬁnd the number of moles of methane
molecules in 2.50  103 kg (2.50  106 g) of methane:
2.50  106 g CH4 

1 mol CH4
 1.56  105 mol CH4 molecules
16.04 g CH4

h
molar mass of CH4

3.10 Calculations Involving a Limiting Reactant

107

FIGURE 3.9
Three different stoichiometric mixtures of
methane and water, which react one-to-one.

This same number of water molecules has a mass determined as follows:
1.56  105 mol H2O 

18.02 g
 2.81  106 g H2O  2.81  103 kg H2O
mol H2O

Thus, if 2.50  103 kilograms of methane is mixed with 2.81  103 kilograms of water,
both reactants will “run out” at the same time. The reactants have been mixed in stoichiometric quantities.
If, on the other hand, 2.50  103 kilograms of methane is mixed with 3.00  103
kilograms of water, the methane will be consumed before the water runs out. The water
will be in excess; that is, there will be more water molecules than methane molecules in
the reaction mixture. What is the implication of this with respect to the number of product molecules that can form?
To answer this question, consider the situation on a smaller scale. Assume we mix
10 CH4 molecules and 17 H2O molecules and let them react. How many H2 and CO molecules can form?
First picture the mixture of CH4
and H2O
molecules as shown in
Fig. 3.10.
Then imagine that groups consisting of one CH4 molecule and one H2O molecule
(Fig. 3.10) will react to form three H2 and one CO molecules (Fig. 3.11).
Notice that products can form only when both CH4 and H2O are available to react. Once
the 10 CH4 molecules are used up by reacting with 10 H2O molecules, the remaining water

FIGURE 3.10
A mixture of CH4 and H2O molecules.

FIGURE 3.11
Methane and water have reacted to form products according
to the equation CH4  H2O ¡ 3H2  CO.

108

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
molecules cannot react. They are in excess. Thus the number of products that can form is
limited by the methane. Once the methane is consumed, no more products can be formed,
even though some water still remains. In this situation the amount of methane limits the
amount of products that can be formed. This brings us to the concept of the limiting
reactant (or limiting reagent), which is the reactant that is consumed ﬁrst and that therefore limits the amounts of products that can be formed. In any stoichiometry calculation
involving a chemical reaction, it is essential to determine which reactant is limiting so as
to calculate correctly the amounts of products that will be formed.
To further explore the idea of a limiting reactant, consider the ammonia synthesis
reaction:
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
Assume that 5 N2 molecules and 9 H2 molecules are placed in a ﬂask. Is this a stoichiometric mixture of reactants, or will one of them be consumed before the other runs out?
From the balanced equation we know that each N2 molecule requires 3 H2 molecules for
the reaction to occur:

+

Ammonia is dissolved in irrigation water to
provide fertilizer for a ﬁeld of corn.

Thus the required H2N2 ratio is 3H21N2. In our experiment we have 9 H2 and 5 N2, or
a ratio of 9H25N2  1.8H21N2.
Since the actual ratio (1.8:1) of H2N2 is less than the ratio required by the balanced
equation (3:1), there is not enough hydrogen to react with all the nitrogen. That is, the
hydrogen will run out ﬁrst, leaving some unreacted N2 molecules. We can visualize this
as shown in Fig. 3.12.
Figure 3.12 shows that 3 of the N2 molecules react with the 9 H2 molecules to produce 6 NH3 molecules:
3N2  9H2 ¡ 6NH3
This leaves 2 N2 molecules unreacted—the nitrogen is in excess.
What we have shown here is that in this experiment the hydrogen is the limiting reactant. The amount of H2 initially present determines the amount of NH3 that can form.
The reaction was not able to use up all the N2 molecules because the H2 molecules were
all consumed by the ﬁrst 3 N2 molecules to react.

FIGURE 3.12
Hydrogen and nitrogen react to form ammonia according to the equation
N2  3H2 ¡ 2NH3.

3.10 Calculations Involving a Limiting Reactant

109

Another way to look at this is to determine how much H2 would be required by 5 N2
molecules. Multiplying the balanced equation
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
by 5 gives
5N2 1g2  15H2 1g2 ¡ 10NH3 1g2
Thus 5 N2 molecules would require 15 H2 molecules and we have only 9. This tells us
the same thing we learned earlier—the hydrogen is limiting.
The most important point here is this: The limiting reactant limits the amount of product that can form. The reaction that actually occurred was
3N2 1g2  9H2 1g2 ¡ 6NH3 1g2
not
5N2 1g2  15H2 1g2 ¡ 10NH3 1g2
Thus 6 NH3 were formed, not 10 NH3, because the H2, not the N2, was limiting.
In the laboratory or chemical plant we work with much larger quantities than the few
molecules of the preceding example. Therefore, we must learn to deal with limiting
reactants using moles. The ideas are exactly the same, except that we are using moles of
molecules instead of individual molecules. For example, suppose 25.0 kilograms of
nitrogen and 5.00 kilograms of hydrogen are mixed and reacted to form ammonia. How
do we calculate the mass of ammonia produced when this reaction is run to completion
(until one of the reactants is completely consumed)?
As in the preceding example, we must use the balanced equation
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
to determine whether nitrogen or hydrogen is the limiting reactant and then to determine
the amount of ammonia that is formed. We ﬁrst calculate the moles of reactants present:
1000 g N2
1 mol N2

 8.93  102 mol N2
1 kg N2
28.0 g N2
1000 g H2
1 mol H2
5.00 kg H2 

 2.48  103 mol H2
1 kg H2
2.016 g H2
25.0 kg N2 

Since 1 mol N2 reacts with 3 mol H2, the number of moles of H2 that will react exactly
with 8.93  102 mol N2 is
8.93  102 mol N2 

Always determine which reactant is
limiting.

3 mol H2
 2.68  103 mol H2
1 mol N2

Thus 8.93  102 mol N2 requires 2.68  103 mol H2 to react completely. However, in
this case, only 2.48  103 mol H2 is present. This means that the hydrogen will be
consumed before the nitrogen. Thus hydrogen is the limiting reactant in this particular
situation, and we must use the amount of hydrogen to compute the quantity of ammonia
formed:
2.48  103 mol H2 

2 mol NH3
 1.65  103 mol NH3
3 mol H2

Converting moles to kilograms gives
1.65  103 mol NH3 

17.0 g NH3
 2.80  104 g NH3  28.0 kg NH3
1 mol NH3

110

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
Note that to determine the limiting reactant, we could have started instead with the
given amount of hydrogen and calculated the moles of nitrogen required:
2.48  103 mol H2 

1 mol N2
 8.27  102 mol N2
3 mol H2

Thus 2.48  103 mol H2 requires 8.27  102 mol N2. Since 8.93  102 mol N2 is actually present, the nitrogen is in excess. The hydrogen will run out ﬁrst, and thus again we
ﬁnd that hydrogen limits the amount of ammonia formed.
A related but simpler way to determine which reactant is limiting is to compare the
mole ratio of the substances required by the balanced equation with the mole ratio of
reactants actually present. For example, in this case the mole ratio of H2 to N2 required
by the balanced equation is
3 mol H2
1 mol N2
That is,
mol H2
3
1required2   3
mol N2
1
In this experiment we have 2.48  103 mol H2 and 8.93  102 mol N2. Thus the ratio
mol H2
2.48  103
1actual2 
 2.78
mol N2
8.93  102
Since 2.78 is less than 3, the actual mole ratio of H2 to N2 is too small, and H2 must be
limiting. If the actual H2 to N2 mole ratio had been greater than 3, then the H2 would have
been in excess and the N2 would be limiting.
Sample Exercise 3.18

Stoichiometry: Limiting Reactant
Nitrogen gas can be prepared by passing gaseous ammonia over solid copper(II) oxide at
high temperatures. The other products of the reaction are solid copper and water vapor.
If a sample containing 18.1 g of NH3 is reacted with 90.4 g of CuO, which is the limiting reactant? How many grams of N2 will be formed?
Solution
From the description of the problem, we can obtain the following balanced equation:
2NH3 1g2  3CuO1s2 ¡ N2 1g2  3Cu1s2  3H2O1g2
Next we must compute the moles of NH3 (molar mass  17.03 g/mol) and of CuO (molar
mass  79.55 g/mol):
18.1 g NH3 

1 mol NH3
 1.06 mol NH3
17.03 g NH3

90.4 g CuO 

1 mol CuO
 1.14 mol CuO
79.55 g CuO

To determine the limiting reactant, we use the mole ratio for CuO and NH3:
1.06 mol NH3 

3 mol CuO
 1.59 mol CuO
2 mol NH3

Thus 1.59 mol CuO is required to react with 1.06 mol NH3. Since only 1.14 mol CuO is
actually present, the amount of CuO is limiting; CuO will run out before NH3 does. We

3.10 Calculations Involving a Limiting Reactant

111

can verify this conclusion by comparing the mole ratio of CuO and NH3 required by the
balanced equation
mol CuO
3
1required2   1.5
mol NH3
2
with the mole ratio actually present
mol CuO
1.14
1actual2 
 1.08
mol NH3
1.06
Since the actual ratio is too small (smaller than 1.5), CuO is the limiting reactant.
Because CuO is the limiting reactant, we must use the amount of CuO to calculate the amount of N2 formed. From the balanced equation, the mole ratio between CuO
and N2 is
1 mol N2
3 mol CuO
1 mol N2
1.14 mol CuO 
 0.380 mol N2
3 mol CuO
Using the molar mass of N2 (28.0 g/mol), we can calculate the mass of N2 produced:
0.380 mol N2 

28.0 g N2
 10.6 g N2
1 mol N2
See Exercises 3.99 through 3.101.

The amount of a product formed when the limiting reactant is completely consumed
is called the theoretical yield of that product. In Sample Exercise 3.18, 10.6 grams of nitrogen represents the theoretical yield. This is the maximum amount of nitrogen that can
be produced from the quantities of reactants used. Actually, the amount of product predicted by the theoretical yield is seldom obtained because of side reactions (other reactions that involve one or more of the reactants or products) and other complications. The
actual yield of product is often given as a percentage of the theoretical yield. This is called
the percent yield:
Actual yield
 100%  percent yield
Theoretical yield

Percent yield is important as an indicator
of the efﬁciency of a particular laboratory
or industrial reaction.

For example, if the reaction considered in Sample Exercise 3.18 actually gave 6.63 grams
of nitrogen instead of the predicted 10.6 grams, the percent yield of nitrogen would be
6.63 g N2
 100%  62.5%
10.6 g N2
Sample Exercise 3.19

Calculating Percent Yield
Methanol (CH3OH), also called methyl alcohol, is the simplest alcohol. It is used as a fuel
in race cars and is a potential replacement for gasoline. Methanol can be manufactured
by combination of gaseous carbon monoxide and hydrogen. Suppose 68.5 kg CO(g) is reacted with 8.60 kg H2(g). Calculate the theoretical yield of methanol. If 3.57  104 g
CH3OH is actually produced, what is the percent yield of methanol?

Methanol

Solution
First, we must ﬁnd out which reactant is limiting. The balanced equation is
2H2 1g2  CO1g2 ¡ CH3OH1l2

112

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
Next we must calculate the moles of reactants:
1000 g CO
1 mol CO

 2.44  103 mol CO
1 kg CO
28.02 g CO
1000 g H2
1 mol H2
8.60 kg H2 

 4.27  103 mol H2
1 kg H2
2.016 g H2

68.5 kg CO 

To determine which reactant is limiting, we compare the mole ratio of H2 and CO required by the balanced equation
mol H2
2
1required2   2
mol CO
1
with the actual mole ratio
mol H2
4.27  103
1actual2 
 1.75
mol CO
2.44  103
Since the actual mole ratio of H2 to CO is smaller than the required ratio, H2 is limiting.
We therefore must use the amount of H2 and the mole ratio between H2 and CH3OH to
determine the maximum amount of methanol that can be produced:
4.27  103 mol H2 

1 mol CH3OH
 2.14  103 mol CH3OH
2 mol H2

Using the molar mass of CH3OH (32.04 g/mol), we can calculate the theoretical yield in grams:
2.14  103 mol CH3OH 

32.04 g CH3OH
 6.86  104 g CH3OH
1 mol CH3OH

Thus, from the amount of reactants given, the maximum amount of CH3OH that can be
formed is 6.86  104 g. This is the theoretical yield.
The percent yield is
Actual yield 1grams2
3.57  104 g CH3OH
 100 
 100%  52.0%
Theoretical yield 1grams2
6.86  104 g CH3OH
See Exercises 3.103 and 3.104.

Methanol is used as a fuel in Indianapolistype racing cars.

For Review

113

Solving a Stoichiometry Problem Involving Masses of Reactants and Products

➥1
➥2
➥3
➥4
➥5

Write and balance the equation for the reaction.
Convert the known masses of substances to moles.
Determine which reactant is limiting.
Using the amount of the limiting reactant and the appropriate mole ratios,
compute the number of moles of the desired product.
Convert from moles to grams, using the molar mass.

This process is summarized in the diagram below:

Balanced chemical
equation
Find appropriate
mole ratio
Moles desired substance
Moles limiting reactant

Masses of
known substances
Convert
to moles
Moles of
known substances

Mass of
desired product
Convert
to grams

Find limiting
reactant
Moles limiting
reactant

Key Terms
chemical stoichiometry

Section 3.2
mass spectrometer
average atomic mass

Section 3.3
mole
Avogadro’s number

Section 3.4
molar mass

Section 3.5
mass percent

Section 3.6
empirical formula
molecular formula

Use mole ratio
to convert

Moles of
desired product

For Review
Stoichiometry
䊉 Deals with the amounts of substances consumed and/or produced in a chemical reaction.
䊉 We count atoms by measuring the mass of the sample.
䊉 To relate mass and the number of atoms, the average atomic mass is required.
Mole
12
䊉 The amount of carbon atoms in exactly 12 g of pure
C
23
䊉 6.022  10
units of a substance
䊉 The mass of one mole of an element  the atomic mass in grams
Molar mass
䊉 Mass (g) of one mole of a compound or element
䊉 Obtained for a compound by ﬁnding the sum of the average masses of its constituent
atoms

114

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

Section 3.7
chemical equation
reactants
products
balancing a chemical equation

Section 3.9
mole ratio

Section 3.10
stoichiometric quantities
Haber process
limiting reactant (reagent)
theoretical yield
percent yield

Percent composition
䊉 The mass percent of each element in a compound
mass of element in 1 mole of substance
䊉 Mass percent 
 100%
mass of 1 mole of substance
Empirical formula
䊉 The simplest whole-number ratio of the various types of atoms in a compound
䊉 Can be obtained from the mass percent of elements in a compound
Molecular formula
䊉 For molecular substances:
• The formula of the constituent molecules
• Always an integer multiple of the empirical formula
䊉 For ionic substances:
• The same as the empirical formula
Chemical reactions
䊉 Reactants are turned into products.
䊉 Atoms are neither created nor destroyed.
䊉 All of the atoms present in the reactants must also be present in the products.
Characteristics of a chemical equation
䊉 Represents a chemical reaction
䊉 Reactants on the left side of the arrow, products on the right side
䊉 When balanced, gives the relative numbers of reactant and product molecules or ions
Stoichiometry calculations
䊉 Amounts of reactants consumed and products formed can be determined from the
balanced chemical equation.
䊉 The limiting reactant is the one consumed ﬁrst, thus limiting the amount of product that can form.
Yield
䊉 The theoretical yield is the maximum amount that can be produced from a given
amount of the limiting reactant.
䊉 The actual yield, the amount of product actually obtained, is always less than the
theoretical yield.
actual yield 1g2
䊉 Percent yield 
 100%
theoretical yield 1g2

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain the concept of “counting by weighing” using marbles as your example.
2. Atomic masses are relative masses. What does this mean?
3. The atomic mass of boron (B) is given in the periodic table as 10.81, yet no
single atom of boron has a mass of 10.81 amu. Explain.
4. What three conversion factors and in what order would you use them to convert
the mass of a compound into atoms of a particular element in that compound—
for example, from 1.00 g aspirin (C9H8O4) to number of hydrogen atoms in the
1.00-g sample?
5. Figure 3.5 illustrates a schematic diagram of a combustion device used to analyze organic compounds. Given that a certain amount of a compound containing
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen is combusted in this device, explain how the data
relating to the mass of CO2 produced and the mass of H2O produced can be
manipulated to determine the empirical formula.

Active Learning Questions

115

6. What is the difference between the empirical and molecular formulas of a
compound? Can they ever be the same? Explain.
7. Consider the hypothetical reaction between A2 and AB pictured below.

A2
AB
A2B

What is the balanced equation? If 2.50 mol A2 is reacted with excess AB, what
amount (moles) of product will form? If the mass of AB is 30.0 amu and the
mass of A2 is 40.0 amu, what is the mass of the product? If 15.0 g of AB is
reacted, what mass of A2 is required to react with all of the AB, and what mass
of product is formed?
8. What is a limiting reactant problem? Explain two different strategies that can be
used to solve limiting reactant problems.
9. Consider the following mixture of SO2(g) and O2(g).

O2
SO2
?

If SO2(g) and O2(g) react to form SO3(g), draw a representation of the product
mixture assuming the reaction goes to completion. What is the limiting reactant
in the reaction? If 96.0 g of SO2 reacts with 32.0 g O2, what mass of product
will form?
10. Why is the actual yield of a reaction often less than the theoretical yield?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class.
The questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts
through discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is
the learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. The following are actual student responses to the question: Why
is it necessary to balance chemical equations?
a. The chemicals will not react until you have added the correct
mole ratios.

b. The correct products will not be formed unless the right
amount of reactants have been added.
c. A certain number of products cannot be formed without a certain number of reactants.
d. The balanced equation tells you how much reactant you need
and allows you to predict how much product you’ll make.
e. A mole-to-mole ratio must be established for the reaction to
occur as written.
Justify the best choice, and for choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them.
2. What information do we get from a formula? From an equation?

116

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

3. You are making cookies and are missing a key ingredient—
eggs. You have most of the other ingredients needed to make the
cookies, except you have only 1.33 cups of butter and no eggs.
You note that the recipe calls for 2 cups of butter and 3 eggs
(plus the other ingredients) to make 6 dozen cookies. You call a
friend and have him bring you some eggs.
a. What number of eggs do you need?
b. If you use all the butter (and get enough eggs), what number
of cookies will you make?
Unfortunately, your friend hangs up before you tell him how
many eggs you need. When he arrives, he has a surprise for you—
to save time, he has broken them all in a bowl for you. You ask
him how many he brought, and he replies, “I can’t remember.”
You weigh the eggs and ﬁnd that they weigh 62.1 g. Assuming
that an average egg weighs 34.21 g,
a. What quantity of butter is needed to react with all the eggs?
b. What number of cookies can you make?
c. Which will you have left over, eggs or butter?
d. What quantity is left over?
4. Nitrogen (N2) and hydrogen (H2) react to form ammonia (NH3).
Consider the mixture of N2 (

) and H2 (

8. Consider an iron bar on a balance as shown.

75.0g

As the iron bar rusts, which of the following is true? Explain
your answer.
a. The balance will read less than 75.0 g.
b. The balance will read 75.0 g.
c. The balance will read greater than 75.0 g.
d. The balance will read greater than 75.0 g, but if the bar is
removed, the rust is scraped off, and the bar replaced, the
balance will read 75.0 g.
9. You may have noticed that water sometimes drips from the exhaust
of a car as it is running. Is this evidence that there is at least a small
amount of water originally present in the gasoline? Explain.

) in a

closed container as illustrated below:

Assuming the reaction goes to completion, draw a representation of the product mixture. Explain how you arrived at this
representation.
5. For the preceding question, which of the following equations
best represents the reaction?
a. 6N2  6H2 ¡ 4NH3  4N2
b. N2  H2 ¡ NH3
c. N  3H ¡ NH3
d. N2  3H2 ¡ 2NH3
e. 2N2  6H2 ¡ 4NH3
Justify your choice, and for choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them.
6. You know that chemical A reacts with chemical B. You
react 10.0 g A with 10.0 g B. What information do you need
to determine the amount of product that will be produced?
Explain.
7. A new grill has a mass of 30.0 kg. You put 3.0 kg of charcoal
in the grill. You burn all the charcoal and the grill has a
mass of 30.0 kg. What is the mass of the gases given off?
Explain.

Questions 10 and 11 deal with the following situation: You react chemical A
with chemical B to make one product. It takes 100 g of A to react completely
with 20 g B.

10. What is the mass of the product?
a. less than 10 g
b. between 20 and 100 g
c. between 100 and 120 g
d. exactly 120 g
e. more than 120 g
11. What is true about the chemical properties of the product?
a. The properties are more like chemical A.
b. The properties are more like chemical B.
c. The properties are an average of those of chemical A and
chemical B.
d. The properties are not necessarily like either chemical A or
chemical B.
e. The properties are more like chemical A or more like chemical B, but more information is needed.
Justify your choice, and for choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them.
12. Is there a difference between a homogeneous mixture of hydrogen
and oxygen in a 2:1 mole ratio and a sample of water vapor?
Explain.
13. Chlorine exists mainly as two isotopes, 37Cl and 35Cl. Which is
more abundant? How do you know?
14. The average mass of a carbon atom is 12.011. Assuming you could
pick up one carbon atom, estimate the chance that you would randomly get one with a mass of 12.011. Support your answer.
15. Can the subscripts in a chemical formula be fractions? Explain.
Can the coefﬁcients in a balanced chemical equation be fractions? Explain. Changing the subscripts of chemicals can balance the equations mathematically. Why is this unacceptable?
16. Consider the equation 2A  B ¡ A2B. If you mix 1.0 mol of
A with 1.0 mol of B, what amount (moles) of A2B can be produced?

Exercises
17. According to the law of conservation of mass, mass cannot be
gained or destroyed in a chemical reaction. Why can’t you simply add the masses of two reactants to determine the total mass
of product?
18. Which of the following pairs of compounds have the same
empirical formula?
a. acetylene, C2H2, and benzene, C6H6
b. ethane, C2H6, and butane, C4H10
c. nitrogen dioxide, NO2, and dinitrogen tetroxide, N2O4
d. diphenyl ether, C12H10O, and phenol, C6H5OH
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of the book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
19. Reference section 3.2 to ﬁnd the atomic masses of 12C and 13C,
the relative abundance of 12C and 13C in natural carbon, and the
average mass (in amu) of a carbon atom. If you had a sample of
natural carbon containing exactly 10,000 atoms, determine the
number of 12C and 13C atoms present. What would be the average mass (in amu) and the total mass (in amu) of the carbon
atoms in this 10,000-atom sample? If you had a sample of natural carbon containing 6.0221  1023 atoms, determine the number of 12C and 13C atoms present. What would be the average
mass (in amu) and the total mass (in amu) of this 6.0221  1023
atom sample? Given that 1 g  6.0221  1023 amu, what is the
total mass of 1 mol of natural carbon in units of grams?
20. Avogadro’s number, molar mass, and the chemical formula of a
compound are three useful conversion factors. What unit conversions can be accomplished using these conversion factors?
21. If you had a mol of U.S. dollar bills and equally distributed the
money to all of the people of the world, how rich would every
person be? Assume a world population of 6 billion.
22. What is the difference between the molar mass and the empirical formula mass of a compound? When are these masses the
same and when are they different? When different, how is the
molar mass related to the empirical formula mass?
23. How is the mass percent of elements in a compound different
for a 1.0-g sample versus a 100.-g sample versus a 1-mol sample of the compound?
24. A balanced chemical equation contains a large amount of information. What information is given in a balanced equation?
25. Consider the following generic reaction:
A2B2  2C ¡ 2CB and 2A
What steps and information are necessary to perform the following determinations assuming that 1.00  104 molecules of
A2B2 are reacted with excess C?
a. mass of CB produced
b. atoms of A produced
c. mol of C reacted
d. percent yield of CB
26. Consider the following generic reaction:
Y2  2XY ¡ 2XY2

117

In a limiting reactant problem, a certain quantity of each reactant
is given and you are usually asked to calculate the mass of product formed. If 10.0 g of Y2 is reacted with 10.0 g of XY, outline
two methods you could use the determine which reactant is limiting (runs out ﬁrst) and thus determines the mass of product
formed. A method sometimes used to solve limiting reactant problems is to assume each reactant is limiting and then calculate the
mass of product formed from each given quantity of reactant. How
does this method work in determining which reactant is limiting?

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Atomic Masses and the Mass Spectrometer
27. An element consists of 1.40% of an isotope with mass 203.973
amu, 24.10% of an isotope with mass 205.9745 amu, 22.10% of
an isotope with mass 206.9759 amu, and 52.40% of an isotope
with mass 207.9766 amu. Calculate the average atomic mass and
identify the element.
28. An element “X” has ﬁve major isotopes, which are listed below
along with their abundances. What is the element?
Isotope
46

X
X
48
X
49
X
50
X
47

Percent Natural Abundance

Atomic Mass

8.00%
7.30%
73.80%
5.50%
5.40%

45.95269
46.951764
47.947947
48.947841
49.944792

29. The element rhenium (Re) has two naturally occurring isotopes,
185
Re and 187Re, with an average atomic mass of 186.207 amu.
Rhenium is 62.60% 187Re, and the atomic mass of 187Re is
186.956 amu. Calculate the mass of 185Re.
30. Assume silicon has three major isotopes in nature as shown in
the table below. Fill in the missing information.
Isotope
28

Si
Si
32
Si
29

Mass (amu)

Abundance

27.98
——––—
29.97

——––—
4.70%
3.09%

31. The mass spectrum of bromine (Br2) consists of three peaks with
the following characteristics:
Mass (amu)

Relative Size

157.84
159.84
161.84

0.2534
0.5000
0.2466

How do you interpret these data?

118

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

32. Gallium arsenide, GaAs, has gained widespread use in semiconductor devices that convert light and electrical signals in ﬁberoptic communications systems. Gallium consists of 60.% 69Ga
and 40.% 71Ga. Arsenic has only one naturally occurring isotope,
75
As. Gallium arsenide is a polymeric material, but its mass
spectrum shows fragments with the formulas GaAs and Ga2As2.
What would the distribution of peaks look like for these two
fragments?

Moles and Molar Masses
33. Calculate the mass of 500. atoms of iron (Fe).
34. What number of Fe atoms and what amount (moles) of Fe atoms
are in 500.0 g of iron?
35. Diamond is a natural form of pure carbon. What number of atoms
of carbon are in a 1.00-carat diamond (1.00 carat  0.200 g)?
36. A diamond contains 5.0  1021 atoms of carbon. What amount
(moles) of carbon and what mass (grams) of carbon are in this
diamond?
37. Aluminum metal is produced by passing an electric current
through a solution of aluminum oxide (Al2O3) dissolved in
molten cryolite (Na3AlF6). Calculate the molar masses of Al2O3
and Na3AlF6.
38. The Freons are a class of compounds containing carbon, chlorine, and ﬂuorine. While they have many valuable uses, they
have been shown to be responsible for depletion of the ozone in
the upper atmosphere. In 1991, two replacement compounds
for Freons went into production: HFC-134a (CH2FCF3) and
HCFC-124 (CHClFCF3). Calculate the molar masses of these
two compounds.
39. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances.
a.
b.
H
H

N

N

c. (NH4)2Cr2O7
40. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances.
a.
O
P

b. Ca3(PO4)2

45. What mass of nitrogen is present in 5.00 mol of each of the compounds in Exercise 39?
46. What mass of phosphorus is present in 5.00 mol of each of the
compounds in Exercise 40?
47. What number of molecules (or formula units) are present in
1.00 g of each of the compounds in Exercise 39?
48. What number of molecules (or formula units) are present in
1.00 g of each of the compounds in Exercise 40?
49. What number of atoms of nitrogen are present in 1.00 g of each
of the compounds in Exercise 39?
50. What number of atoms of phosphorus are present in 1.00 g of
each of the compounds in Exercise 40?
51. Ascorbic acid, or vitamin C (C6H8O6), is an essential vitamin. It
cannot be stored by the body and must be present in the diet.
What is the molar mass of ascorbic acid? Vitamin C tablets are
taken as a dietary supplement. If a typical tablet contains 500.0 mg
of vitamin C, what amount (moles) and what number of molecules
of vitamin C does it contain?
52. The molecular formula of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), one of
the most commonly used pain relievers, is C9H8O4.
a. Calculate the molar mass of aspirin.
b. A typical aspirin tablet contains 500. mg of C9H8O4. What
amount (moles) of C9H8O4 molecules and what number of
molecules of acetylsalicylic acid are in a 500.-mg tablet?
53. What amount (moles) are represented by each of these samples?
a. 150.0 g Fe2O3
c. 1.5  1016 molecules of BF3
b. 10.0 mg NO2
54. What amount (moles) is represented by each of these samples?
a. 20.0 mg caffeine, C8H10N4O2
b. 2.72  1021 molecules of ethanol, C2H5OH
c. 1.50 g of dry ice, CO2
55. What number of atoms of nitrogen are present in 5.00 g of each
of the following?
a. glycine, C2H5O2N
c. calcium nitrate
b. magnesium nitride
d. dinitrogen tetroxide
56. Complete the following table.

Mass of
Sample
c. Na2HPO4

41. What amount (moles) of compound is present in 1.00 g of each
of the compounds in Exercise 39?
42. What amount (moles) of compound is present in 1.00 g of each
of the compounds in Exercise 40?
43. What mass of compound is present in 5.00 mol of each of the
compounds in Exercise 39?
44. What mass of compound is present in 5.00 mol of each of the
compounds in Exercise 40?

Moles of
Sample

4.24 g C6H6
——––—
——––— 0.224 mol H2O
——––—
——––—
——––—

——––—

Molecules
in Sample
——––—
——––—
2.71  1022
molecules CO2
——––—

Total
Atoms in
Sample
——––—
——––—
——––—
3.35  1022 total
atoms in CH3OH
sample

57. Aspartame is an artiﬁcial sweetener that is 160 times sweeter
than sucrose (table sugar) when dissolved in water. It is marketed

Exercises
as Nutra-Sweet. The molecular formula of aspartame is
C14H18N2O5.
a. Calculate the molar mass of aspartame.
b. What amount (moles) of molecules are present in 10.0 g aspartame?
c. Calculate the mass in grams of 1.56 mol aspartame.
d. What number of molecules are in 5.0 mg aspartame?
e. What number of atoms of nitrogen are in 1.2 g aspartame?
f. What is the mass in grams of 1.0  109 molecules of
aspartame?
g. What is the mass in grams of one molecule of aspartame?
58. Chloral hydrate (C2H3Cl3O2) is a drug formerly used as a sedative and hypnotic. It is the compound used to make “Mickey
Finns” in detective stories.
a. Calculate the molar mass of chloral hydrate.
b. What amount (moles) of C2H3Cl3O2 molecules are in 500.0 g
chloral hydrate?
c. What is the mass in grams of 2.0  102 mol chloral hydrate?
d. What number of chlorine atoms are in 5.0 g chloral hydrate?
e. What mass of chloral hydrate would contain 1.0 g Cl?
f. What is the mass of exactly 500 molecules of chloral hydrate?

119

64. Fungal laccase, a blue protein found in wood-rotting fungi, is
0.390% Cu by mass. If a fungal laccase molecule contains 4 copper atoms, what is the molar mass of fungal laccase?

Empirical and Molecular Formulas
65. Express the composition of each of the following compounds as
the mass percents of its elements.
a. formaldehyde, CH2O
b. glucose, C6H12O6
c. acetic acid, HC2H3O2
66. Considering your answer to Exercise 65, which type of formula,
empirical or molecular, can be obtained from elemental analysis that gives percent composition?
67. Give the empirical formula for each of the compounds represented below.

Percent Composition
59. Calculate the percent composition by mass of the following
compounds that are important starting materials for synthetic
polymers:
a. C3H4O2 (acrylic acid, from which acrylic plastics are made)
b. C4H6O2 (methyl acrylate, from which Plexiglas is made)
c. C3H3N (acrylonitrile, from which Orlon is made)

a.

c.

H
O

60. Anabolic steroids are performance enhancement drugs whose use
has been banned from most major sporting activities. One anabolic steroid is ﬂuoxymesterone (C20H29FO3). Calculate the percent composition by mass of ﬂuoxymesterone.
61. Several important compounds contain only nitrogen and oxygen.
Place the following compounds in order of increasing mass percent of nitrogen.
a. NO, a gas formed by the reaction of N2 with O2 in internal
combustion engines
b. NO2, a brown gas mainly responsible for the brownish color
of photochemical smog
c. N2O4, a colorless liquid used as fuel in space shuttles
d. N2O, a colorless gas sometimes used as an anesthetic by dentists (known as laughing gas)
62. Arrange the following substances in order of increasing mass
percent of carbon.
a. caffeine, C8H10N4O2
b. sucrose, C12H22O11
c. ethanol, C2H5OH
63. Vitamin B12, cyanocobalamin, is essential for human nutrition.
It is concentrated in animal tissue but not in higher plants.
Although nutritional requirements for the vitamin are quite low,
people who abstain completely from animal products may
develop a deﬁciency anemia. Cyanocobalamin is the form used
in vitamin supplements. It contains 4.34% cobalt by mass.
Calculate the molar mass of cyanocobalamin, assuming that there
is one atom of cobalt in every molecule of cyanocobalamin.

b.

N
C
P

d.
68. Determine the molecular formulas to which the following
empirical formulas and molar masses pertain.
a. SNH (188.35 g/mol)
b. NPCl2 (347.64 g/mol)
c. CoC4O4 (341.94 g/mol)
d. SN (184.32 g/mol)
69. The compound adrenaline contains 56.79% C, 6.56% H, 28.37%
O, and 8.28% N by mass. What is the empirical formula for
adrenaline?
70. The most common form of nylon (nylon-6) is 63.68% carbon,
12.38% nitrogen, 9.80% hydrogen, and 14.14% oxygen. Calculate the empirical formula for nylon-6.
71. There are two binary compounds of mercury and oxygen. Heating either of them results in the decomposition of the compound,
with oxygen gas escaping into the atmosphere while leaving a
residue of pure mercury. Heating 0.6498 g of one of the compounds leaves a residue of 0.6018 g. Heating 0.4172 g of the
other compound results in a mass loss of 0.016 g. Determine the
empirical formula of each compound.

120

Chapter Three Stoichiometry

72. A sample of urea contains 1.121 g N, 0.161 g H, 0.480 g C, and
0.640 g O. What is the empirical formula of urea?
73. A compound containing only sulfur and nitrogen is 69.6% S by
mass; the molar mass is 184 g/mol. What are the empirical and
molecular formulas of the compound?
74. Determine the molecular formula of a compound that contains
26.7% P, 12.1% N, and 61.2% Cl, and has a molar mass of
580 g/mol.
75. Adipic acid is an organic compound composed of 49.31% C,
43.79% O, and the rest hydrogen. If the molar mass of adipic
acid is 146.1 g/mol, what are the empirical and molecular formulas for adipic acid?
76. Maleic acid is an organic compound composed of 41.39% C,
3.47% H, and the rest oxygen. If 0.129 mol of maleic acid has
a mass of 15.0 g, what are the empirical and molecular formulas
of maleic acid?
77. Many homes in rural America are heated by propane gas, a
compound that contains only carbon and hydrogen. Complete
combustion of a sample of propane produced 2.641 g of carbon
dioxide and 1.442 g of water as the only products. Find the empirical formula of propane.
78. A compound contains only C, H, and N. Combustion of
35.0 mg of the compound produces 33.5 mg CO2 and 41.1 mg
H2O. What is the empirical formula of the compound?
79. Cumene is a compound containing only carbon and hydrogen
that is used in the production of acetone and phenol in the chemical industry. Combustion of 47.6 mg cumene produces some
CO2 and 42.8 mg water. The molar mass of cumene is between
115 and 125 g/mol. Determine the empirical and molecular
formulas.
80. A compound contains only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
Combustion of 10.68 mg of the compound yields 16.01 mg
CO2 and 4.37 mg H2O. The molar mass of the compound is
176.1 g/mol. What are the empirical and molecular formulas of
the compound?

Balancing Chemical Equations
81. Give the balanced equation for each of the following chemical
reactions:
a. Glucose (C6H12O6) reacts with oxygen gas to produce gaseous
carbon dioxide and water vapor.
b. Solid iron(III) sulﬁde reacts with gaseous hydrogen chloride
to form solid iron(III) chloride and hydrogen sulﬁde gas.
c. Carbon disulﬁde liquid reacts with ammonia gas to produce
hydrogen sulﬁde gas and solid ammonium thiocyanate
(NH4SCN).
82. Give the balanced equation for each of the following.
a. The combustion of ethanol (C2H5OH) forms carbon dioxide
and water vapor. A combustion reaction refers to a reaction
of a substance with oxygen gas.
b. Aqueous solutions of lead(II) nitrate and sodium phosphate
are mixed, resulting in the precipitate formation of lead(II)
phosphate with aqueous sodium nitrate as the other product.

c. Solid zinc reacts with aqueous HCl to form aqueous zinc
chloride and hydrogen gas.
d. Aqueous strontium hydroxide reacts with aqueous hydrobromic acid to produce water and aqueous strontium
bromide.
83. Balance the following equations:
a. Ca1OH2 2 1aq2  H3PO4 1aq2 S H2O1l2  Ca3 1PO4 2 2 1s2
b. Al1OH2 3 1s2  HCl1aq2 S AlCl3 1aq2  H2O1l2
c. AgNO3 1aq2  H2SO4 1aq2 S Ag2SO4 1s2  HNO3 1aq2
84. Balance each of the following chemical equations.
a. KO2 1s2  H2O1l2 S KOH1aq2  O2 1g2  H2O2 1aq2
b. Fe2O3 1s2  HNO3 1aq2 S Fe1NO3 2 3 1aq2  H2O1l2
c. NH3 1g2  O2 1g2 S NO1g2  H2O1g2
d. PCl5 1l2  H2O1l2 S H3PO4 1aq2  HCl1g2
e. CaO1s2  C1s2 S CaC2 1s2  CO2 1g2
f. MoS2 1s2  O2 1g2 S MoO3 1s2  SO2 1g2
g. FeCO3 1s2  H2CO3 1aq2 S Fe1HCO3 2 2 1aq2
85. Balance the following equations representing combustion reactions:
a.
(l) +

(g) +

(g)
H

C

(g)

O

b.
(g)+

(g)

(g)

+

(g)

c. C12H22O11 1s2  O2 1g2 S CO2 1g2  H2O1g2
d. Fe1s2  O2 1g2 S Fe2O3 1s2
e. FeO1s2  O2 1g2 S Fe2O3 1s2
86. Balance the following equations:
a. Cr1s2  S8 1s2 S Cr2S3 1s2
b. NaHCO3 1s2 ¡ Na2CO3 1s2  CO2 1g2  H2O1g2
Heat

c. KClO3 1s2 ¡ KCl1s2  O2 1g2
d. Eu1s2  HF1g2 S EuF3 1s2  H2 1g2
Heat

87. Silicon is produced for the chemical and electronics industries
by the following reactions. Give the balanced equation for each
reaction.
Electric
—¡ Si1s2  CO1g2
a. SiO2 1s2  C1s2 —
arc furnace
b. Silicon tetrachloride is reacted with very pure magnesium,
producing silicon and magnesium chloride.
c. Na2SiF6 1s2  Na1s2 S Si1s2  NaF1s2
88. Glass is a mixture of several compounds, but a major constituent
of most glass is calcium silicate, CaSiO3. Glass can be etched
by treatment with hydroﬂuoric acid; HF attacks the calcium silicate of the glass, producing gaseous and water-soluble products
(which can be removed by washing the glass). For example, the
volumetric glassware in chemistry laboratories is often graduated by using this process. Balance the following equation for
the reaction of hydroﬂuoric acid with calcium silicate.
CaSiO3 1s2  HF1aq2 S CaF2 1aq2  SiF4 1g2  H2O1l2

Exercises

Reaction Stoichiometry
89. Over the years, the thermite reaction has been used for welding
railroad rails, in incendiary bombs, and to ignite solid-fuel rocket
motors. The reaction is
Fe2O3 1s2  2Al1s2 ¡ 2Fe1l2  Al2O3 1s2
What masses of iron(III) oxide and aluminum must be used to
produce 15.0 g iron? What is the maximum mass of aluminum
oxide that could be produced?
90. The reaction between potassium chlorate and red phosphorus
takes place when you strike a match on a matchbox. If you were
to react 52.9 g of potassium chlorate (KClO3) with excess red
phosphorus, what mass of tetraphosphorus decaoxide (P4O10)
would be produced?
KClO3 1s2  P4 1s2 ¡ P4O10 1s2  KCl1s2

1unbalanced2

91. The reusable booster rockets of the U.S. space shuttle employ a
mixture of aluminum and ammonium perchlorate for fuel. A
possible equation for this reaction is
3Al1s2  3NH4ClO4 1s2 ¡
Al2O3 1s2  AlCl3 1s2  3NO1g2  6H2O1g2

121

95. Aspirin (C9H8O4) is synthesized by reacting salicylic acid (C7H6O3)
with acetic anhydride (C4H6O3). The balanced equation is
C7H6O3  C4H6O3 ¡ C9H8O4  HC2H3O2
a. What mass of acetic anhydride is needed to completely consume 1.00  102 g salicylic acid?
b. What is the maximum mass of aspirin (the theoretical yield)
that could be produced in this reaction?
96. The space shuttle environmental control system handles excess
CO2 (which the astronauts breathe out; it is 4.0% by mass of exhaled air) by reacting it with lithium hydroxide, LiOH, pellets
to form lithium carbonate, Li2CO3, and water. If there are 7 astronauts on board the shuttle, and each exhales 20. L of air per
minute, how long could clean air be generated if there were
25,000 g of LiOH pellets available for each shuttle mission?
Assume the density of air is 0.0010 g mL.

Limiting Reactants and Percent Yield
97. Consider the reaction between NO(g) and O2(g) represented below.

O2

What mass of NH4ClO4 should be used in the fuel mixture for
every kilogram of Al?
92. One of relatively few reactions that takes place directly between
two solids at room temperature is

NO
NO2

Ba1OH2 2  8H2O1s2  NH4SCN1s2 ¡
Ba1SCN2 2 1s2  H2O1l2  NH3 1g2
In this equation, the  8H2O in Ba(OH)2  8H2O indicates the
presence of eight water molecules. This compound is called barium hydroxide octahydrate.
a. Balance the equation.
b. What mass of ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) must be
used if it is to react completely with 6.5 g barium hydroxide
octahydrate?
93. Bacterial digestion is an economical method of sewage treatment. The reaction
5CO2 1g2  55NH4 1aq2  76O2 1g2 —¡
C5H7O2N1s2  54NO2 1aq2  52H2O1l2  109H 1aq2

What is the balanced equation for this reaction and what is the
limiting reactant?
98. Consider the following reaction:
4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2
If a container were to have 10 molecules of O2 and 10 molecules
of NH3 initially, how many total molecules (reactants plus products) would be present in the container after this reaction goes
to completion?

bacteria

bacterial tissue

is an intermediate step in the conversion of the nitrogen in organic
compounds into nitrate ions. What mass of bacterial tissue is produced in a treatment plant for every 1.0  104 kg of wastewater
containing 3.0% NH 4 ions by mass? Assume that 95% of the
ammonium ions are consumed by the bacteria.
94. Phosphorus can be prepared from calcium phosphate by the following reaction:
2Ca3 1PO4 2 2 1s2  6SiO2 1s2  10C1s2 ¡
6CaSiO3 1s2  P4 1s2  10CO1g2
Phosphorite is a mineral that contains Ca3(PO4)2 plus other
non-phosphorus-containing compounds. What is the maximum
amount of P4 that can be produced from 1.0 kg of phosphorite
if the phorphorite sample is 75% Ca3(PO4)2 by mass? Assume
an excess of the other reactants.

99. Hydrogen peroxide is used as a cleaning agent in the treatment
of cuts and abrasions for several reasons. It is an oxidizing agent
that can directly kill many microorganisms; it decomposes upon
contact with blood, releasing elemental oxygen gas (which inhibits the growth of anaerobic microorganisms); and it foams
upon contact with blood, which provides a cleansing action. In
the laboratory, small quantities of hydrogen peroxide can be prepared by the action of an acid on an alkaline earth metal peroxide, such as barium peroxide:
BaO2 1s2  2HCl1aq2 ¡ H2O2 1aq2  BaCl2 1aq2
What mass of hydrogen peroxide should result when 1.50 g of
barium peroxide is treated with 25.0 mL of hydrochloric acid
solution containing 0.0272 g of HCl per mL? What mass of
which reagent is left unreacted?
100. Consider the following unbalanced equation:
Ca3 1PO4 2 2 1s2  H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ CaSO4 1s2  H3PO4 1aq2

122

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
What masses of calcium sulfate and phosphoric acid can be produced from the reaction of 1.0 kg calcium phosphate with 1.0 kg
concentrated sulfuric acid (98% H2SO4 by mass)?

of 1000. kg/h. What mass of water must be evaporated per hour
if the ﬁnal product contains only 20.% water?
109. Consider the reaction
2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1g2

101. Hydrogen cyanide is produced industrially from the reaction of
gaseous ammonia, oxygen, and methane:
2NH3 1g2  3O2 1g2  2CH4 1g2 ¡ 2HCN1g2  6H2O1g2
If 5.00  103 kg each of NH3, O2, and CH4 are reacted, what mass
of HCN and of H2O will be produced, assuming 100% yield?
102. Acrylonitrile (C3H3N) is the starting material for many synthetic
carpets and fabrics. It is produced by the following reaction.
2C3H6 1g2  2NH3 1g2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2C3H3N1g2  6H2O1g2
If 15.0 g C3H6, 10.0 g O2, and 5.00 g NH3 are reacted, what mass
of acrylonitrile can be produced, assuming 100% yield?
103. A student prepared aspirin in a laboratory experiment using the
reaction in Exercise 95. The student reacted 1.50 g salicylic
acid with 2.00 g acetic anhydride. The yield was 1.50 g aspirin.
Calculate the theoretical yield and the percent yield for this
experiment.
104. DDT, an insecticide harmful to ﬁsh, birds, and humans, is produced by the following reaction:

110.

111.

112.

2C6H5Cl  C2HOCl3 ¡ C14H9Cl5  H2O
chlorobenzene

chloral

DDT

In a government lab, 1142 g of chlorobenzene is reacted with
485 g of chloral.
a. What mass of DDT is formed?
b. Which reactant is limiting? Which is in excess?
c. What mass of the excess reactant is left over?
d. If the actual yield of DDT is 200.0 g, what is the percent
yield?
105. Bornite (Cu3FeS3) is a copper ore used in the production of copper. When heated, the following reaction occurs:
2Cu3FeS3 1s2  7O2 1g2 ¡ 6Cu1s2  2FeO1s2  6SO2 1g2
If 2.50 metric tons of bornite is reacted with excess O2 and the
process has an 86.3% yield of copper, what mass of copper is
produced?
106. Consider the following unbalanced reaction:
P4 1s2  F2 1g2 ¡ PF3 1g2
What mass of F2 is needed to produce 120. g of PF3 if the reaction has a 78.1% yield?

Additional Exercises
107. A given sample of a xenon ﬂuoride compound contains molecules of the type XeFn, where n is some whole number. Given
that 9.03  1020 molecules of XeFn weighs 0.368 g, determine
the value for n in the formula.
108. Many cereals are made with high moisture content so that the
cereal can be formed into various shapes before it is dried. A cereal product containing 58% H2O by mass is produced at the rate

113.

114.

115.

Identify the limiting reagent in each of the reaction mixtures
given below:
a. 50 molecules of H2 and 25 molecules of O2
b. 100 molecules of H2 and 40 molecules of O2
c. 100 molecules of H2 and 100 molecules of O2
d. 0.50 mol H2 and 0.75 mol O2
e. 0.80 mol H2 and 0.75 mol O2
f. 1.0 g H2 and 0.25 mol O2
g. 5.00 g H2 and 56.00 g O2
Some bismuth tablets, a medication used to treat upset stomachs,
contain 262 mg of bismuth subsalicylate, C7H5BiO4, per tablet.
Assuming two tablets are digested, calculate the mass of bismuth
consumed.
The empirical formula of styrene is CH; the molar mass of
styrene is 104.14 g/mol. What number of H atoms are present
in a 2.00-g sample of styrene?
Terephthalic acid is an important chemical used in the manufacture of polyesters and plasticizers. It contains only C, H, and O.
Combustion of 19.81 mg terephthalic acid produces 41.98 mg CO2
and 6.45 mg H2O. If 0.250 mol of terephthalic acid has a mass of
41.5 g, determine the molecular formula for terephthalic acid.
A sample of a hydrocarbon (a compound consisting of only carbon and hydrogen) contains 2.59  1023 atoms of hydrogen and
is 17.3% hydrogen by mass. If the molar mass of the hydrocarbon
is between 55 and 65 g/mol, what amount (moles) of compound
are present, and what is the mass of the sample?
A binary compound between an unknown element E and hydrogen contains 91.27% E and 8.73% H by mass. If the formula
of the compound is E3H8, calculate the atomic mass of E.
A 0.755-g sample of hydrated copper(II) sulfate
CuSO4  xH2O

was heated carefully until it had changed completely to anhydrous copper(II) sulfate (CuSO4) with a mass of 0.483 g. Determine the value of x. [This number is called the number of
waters of hydration of copper(II) sulfate. It speciﬁes the number of water molecules per formula unit of CuSO4 in the hydrated
crystal.]
116. ABS plastic is a tough, hard plastic used in applications requiring
shock resistance. The polymer consists of three monomer units:
acrylonitrile (C3H3N), butadiene (C4H6), and styrene (C8H8).
a. A sample of ABS plastic contains 8.80% N by mass. It took
0.605 g of Br2 to react completely with a 1.20-g sample of
ABS plastic. Bromine reacts 1:1 (by moles) with the
butadiene molecules in the polymer and nothing else. What
is the percent by mass of acrylonitrile and butadiene in this
polymer?
b. What are the relative numbers of each of the monomer units
in this polymer?
117. A sample of LSD (D-lysergic acid diethylamide, C24H30N3O) is
added to some table salt (sodium chloride) to form a mixture.
Given that a 1.00-g sample of the mixture undergoes combustion

Challenge Problems
to produce 1.20 g of CO2, what is the mass percentage of LSD
in the mixture?
118. Methane (CH4) is the main component of marsh gas. Heating
methane in the presence of sulfur produces carbon disulﬁde and
hydrogen sulﬁde as the only products.
a. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction of
methane and sulfur.
b. Calculate the theoretical yield of carbon disulﬁde when 120. g
of methane is reacted with an equal mass of sulfur.
119. A potential fuel for rockets is a combination of B5H9 and O2.
The two react according to the following balanced equation:
2B5H9 1l2  12O2 1g2 ¡ 5B2O3 1s2  9H2O1g2
If one tank in a rocket holds 126 g of B5H9 and another tank
holds 192 g of O2, what mass of water can be produced when
the entire contents of each tank react together?
120. Silver sulfadiazine burn-treating cream creates a barrier against
bacterial invasion and releases antimicrobial agents directly into
the wound. If 25.0 g of Ag2O is reacted with 50.0 g of
C10H10N4SO2, what mass of silver sulfadiazine, AgC10H9N4SO2,
can be produced, assuming 100% yield?
Ag2O1s2  2C10H10N4SO2 1s2 ¡ 2AgC10H9N4SO2 1s2  H2O1l2
121. An iron ore sample contains Fe2O3 plus other impurities. A 752-g
sample of impure iron ore is heated with excess carbon, producing
453 g of pure iron by the following reaction:
Fe2O3 1s2  3C1s2 ¡ 2Fe1s2  3CO1g2
What is the mass percent of Fe2O3 in the impure iron ore sample? Assume that Fe2O3 is the only source of iron and that the
reaction is 100% efﬁcient.
122. Commercial brass, an alloy of Zn and Cu, reacts with hydrochloric acid as follows:
Zn1s2  2HCl1aq2 ¡ ZnCl2 1aq2  H2 1g2
(Cu does not react with HCl.) When 0.5065 g of a certain brass
alloy is reacted with excess HCl, 0.0985 g ZnCl2 is eventually
isolated.
a. What is the composition of the brass by mass?
b. How could this result be checked without changing the above
procedure?
123. Vitamin A has a molar mass of 286.4 g/mol and a general
molecular formula of CxHyE, where E is an unknown element.
If vitamin A is 83.86% C and 10.56% H by mass, what is the
molecular formula of vitamin A?

Challenge Problems
124. Natural rubidium has the average mass of 85.4678 and is composed of isotopes 85Rb (mass  84.9117) and 87Rb. The ratio of
atoms 85Rb/87Rb in natural rubidium is 2.591. Calculate the mass
of 87Rb.
125. A compound contains only carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen. Combustion of 0.157 g of the compound produced 0.213 g
CO2 and 0.0310 g H2O. In another experiment, it is found that
0.103 g of the compound produces 0.0230 g NH3. What is the

123

empirical formula of the compound? Hint: Combustion involves
reacting with excess O2. Assume that all the carbon ends up in
CO2 and all the hydrogen ends up in H2O. Also assume that all
the nitrogen ends up in the NH3 in the second experiment.
126. Nitric acid is produced commercially by the Ostwald process,
represented by the following equations:
4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2
2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

3NO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2HNO3 1aq2  NO1g2
What mass of NH3 must be used to produce 1.0  106 kg HNO3
by the Ostwald process? Assume 100% yield in each reaction
and assume that the NO produced in the third step is not
recycled.
127. Consider a 5.430-g mixture of FeO and Fe3O4. You react this
mixture with an excess of oxygen to form 5.779 g Fe2O3. Calculate the percent by mass of FeO in the original mixture.
128. A 9.780-g gaseous mixture contains ethane (C2H6) and propane
(C3H8). Complete combustion to form carbon dioxide and water
requires 1.120 mol of oxygen. Calculate the mass percent of
ethane in the original mixture.
129. Zinc and magnesium metal each react with hydrochloric acid to
make chloride salts of the respective metals, and hydrogen gas.
A 10.00-g mixture of zinc and magnesium produces 0.5171 g of
hydrogen gas upon being mixed with an excess of hydrochloric
acid. Determine the percent magnesium by mass in the original
mixture.
130. A 2.077-g sample of an element, which has an atomic mass
between 40 and 55, reacts with oxygen to form 3.708 g of an oxide. Determine the formula of the oxide (and identify the element).
131. Consider a gaseous binary compound with a molar mass of 62.09
g mol. When 1.39 g of this compound is completely burned in
excess oxygen, 1.21 g of water is formed. Determine the formula
of the compound. Assume water is the only product that contains hydrogen.
132. A 2.25-g sample of scandium metal is reacted with excess
hydrochloric acid to produce 0.1502 g hydrogen gas. What is the
formula of the scandium chloride produced in the reaction?
133. In the production of printed circuit boards for the electronics industry, a 0.60-mm layer of copper is laminated onto an insulating plastic board. Next, a circuit pattern made of a chemically
resistant polymer is printed on the board. The unwanted copper
is removed by chemical etching, and the protective polymer is
ﬁnally removed by solvents. One etching reaction is
Cu1NH3 2 4Cl2 1aq2  4NH3 1aq2  Cu1s2 ¡ 2Cu1NH3 2 4Cl1aq2
A plant needs to manufacture 10,000 printed circuit boards, each
8.0  16.0 cm in area. An average of 80.% of the copper is removed from each board (density of copper  8.96 g/cm3). What
masses of Cu(NH3)4Cl2 and NH3 are needed to do this? Assume
100% yield.
134. The aspirin substitute, acetaminophen (C8H9O2N), is produced
by the following three-step synthesis:
I. C6H5O3N1s2  3H2 1g2  HCl1aq2 ¡
C6H8ONCl1s2  2H2O1l2

124

Chapter Three Stoichiometry
II. C6H8ONCl1s2  NaOH1aq2 ¡
C6H7ON1s2  H2O1l2  NaCl1aq2

III. C6H7ON1s2  C4H6O3 1l2 ¡

C8H9O2N1s2  HC2H3O2 1l2

The ﬁrst two reactions have percent yields of 87% and 98% by
mass, respectively. The overall reaction yields 3 mol of acetaminophen product for every 4 mol of C6H5O3N reacted.
a. What is the percent yield by mass for the overall process?
b. What is the percent yield by mass of step III?
135. An element X forms both a dichloride (XCl2) and a tetrachloride
(XCl4). Treatment of 10.00 g XCl2 with excess chlorine forms
12.55 g XCl4. Calculate the atomic mass of X, and identify X.
136. When M2S3(s) is heated in air, it is converted to MO2(s).
A 4.000-g sample of M2S3(s) shows a decrease in mass of 0.277
g when it is heated in air. What is the average atomic mass of M?
137. When aluminum metal is heated with an element from Group
6A of the periodic table, an ionic compound forms. When the
experiment is performed with an unknown Group 6A
element, the product is 18.56% Al by mass. What is the
formula of the compound?
138. A sample of a mixture containing only sodium chloride and
potassium chloride has a mass of 4.000 g. When this sample is
dissolved in water and excess silver nitrate is added, a white solid
(silver chloride) forms. After ﬁltration and drying, the solid silver chloride has the mass 8.5904 g. Calculate the mass percent
of each mixture component.
139. Ammonia reacts with O2 to form either NO(g) or NO2(g) according to these unbalanced equations:
NH3 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ NO1g2  H2O1g2

NH3 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  H2O1g2

In a certain experiment 2.00 mol of NH3(g) and 10.00 mol of
O2(g) are contained in a closed ﬂask. After the reaction is complete, 6.75 mol of O2(g) remains. Calculate the number of moles
of NO(g) in the product mixture: (Hint: You cannot do this problem by adding the balanced equations, because you cannot assume that the two reactions will occur with equal probability.)
140. You take 1.00 g of an aspirin tablet (a compound consisting solely
of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen), burn it in air, and collect
2.20 g CO2 and 0.400 g H2O. You know that the molar mass of
aspirin is between 170 and 190 g/mol. Reacting 1 mole of salicylic acid with 1 mole of acetic anhydride (C4H6O3) gives you
1 mole of aspirin and 1 mole of acetic acid (C2H4O2). Use this
information to determine the molecular formula of salicylic acid.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

141. With the advent of techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy, it is now possible to “write” with individual atoms by
manipulating and arranging atoms on an atomic surface.
a. If an image is prepared by manipulating iron atoms and their
total mass is 1.05  1020 g, what number of iron atoms were
used?

b. If the image is prepared on a platinum surface that is exactly
20 platinum atoms high and 14 platinum atoms wide, what
is the mass (grams) of the atomic surface?
c. If the atomic surface were changed to ruthenium atoms and
the same surface mass as determined in part b is used, what
number of ruthenium atoms is needed to construct the surface?
142. Tetrodotoxin is a toxic chemical found in fugu pufferﬁsh, a popular but rare delicacy in Japan. This compound has a LD50 (the
amount of substance that is lethal to 50.% of a population sample)
of 10. ␮g per kg of body mass. Tetrodotoxin is 41.38% carbon
by mass, 13.16% nitrogen by mass, and 5.37% hydrogen by
mass, with the remaining amount consisting of oxygen. What is
the empirical formula of tetrodotoxin? If three molecules of
tetrodotoxin has a mass of 1.59  1021 g, what is the molecular formula of tetrodotoxin? What number of molecules of
tetrodotoxin would be the LD50 dosage for a person weighing
165 lb?
143. An ionic compound MX3 is prepared according to the following
unbalanced chemical equation.
M  X2 ¡ MX3
A 0.105-g sample of X2 contains 8.92  1020 molecules. The
compound MX3 consists of 54.47% X by mass. What are the
identities of M and X, and what is the correct name for MX3?
Starting with 1.00 g each of M and X2, what mass of MX3 can
be prepared?
144. The compound As2I4 is synthesized by reaction of arsenic metal
with arsenic triiodide. If a solid cubic block of arsenic (d 
5.72 g/cm3) that is 3.00 cm on edge is allowed to react with
1.01  1024 molecules of arsenic triiodide, how much As2I4 can
be prepared? If the percent yield of As2I4 was 75.6%, what mass
of As2I4 was actually isolated?

Marathon Problems
These problems are designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

*145. From the information below, determine the mass of substance C
that will be formed if 45.0 grams of substance A reacts with 23.0
grams of substance B. (Assume that the reaction between A and
B goes to completion.)
a. Substance A is a gray solid that consists of an alkaline earth
metal and carbon (37.5% by mass). It reacts with substance B
to produce substances C and D. Forty million trillion formula
units of A have a mass of 4.26 milligrams.
b. 47.9 grams of substance B contains 5.36 grams of hydrogen
and 42.5 grams of oxygen.
c. When 10.0 grams of C is burned in excess oxygen, 33.8 grams
of carbon dioxide and 6.92 grams of water are produced. A
mass spectrum of substance C shows a parent molecular ion
with a mass-to-charge ratio of 26.
d. Substance D is the hydroxide of the metal in substance A.
*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 68,
No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of Chemical
Education, Inc.

Marathon Problems
146. Consider the following balanced chemical equation:
A  5B ¡ 3C  4D
a. Equal masses of A and B are reacted. Complete each of the
following with either “A is the limiting reactant because
”; “B is the limiting reactant because
”; or “we
cannot determine the limiting reactant because
”.
i. If the molar mass of A is greater than the molar mass of
B, then
ii. If the molar mass of B is greater than the molar mass of
A, then

125

b. The products of the reaction are carbon dioxide (C) and water (D). Compound A has the same molar mass as carbon dioxide. Compound B is a diatomic molecule. Identify compound
B and support your answer.
c. Compound A is a hydrocarbon that is 81.71% carbon by mass.
Determine its empirical and molecular formulas.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

4

Types of Chemical Reactions
and Solution Stoichiometry

Contents
4.1 Water, the Common Solvent
4.2 The Nature of Aqueous
Solutions: Strong and Weak
Electrolytes
• Strong Electrolytes
• Weak Electrolytes
• Nonelectrolytes
4.3 The Composition of Solutions
• Dilution
4.4 Types of Chemical Reactions
4.5 Precipitation Reactions
4.6 Describing Reactions in
Solution
4.7 Stoichiometry of
Precipitation Reactions
4.8 Acid–Base Reactions
• Acid–Base Titrations
4.9 Oxidation–Reduction
Reactions
• Oxidation States
• The Characteristics of
Oxidation–Reduction
Reactions
4.10 Balancing Oxidation–
Reduction Equations
• The Half-Reaction Method for
Balancing
Oxidation–Reduction
Reactions in Aqueous
Solutions

Yellow lead(II) iodide is produced when lead(II) nitrate is mixed with potassium iodide.

126

M

uch of the chemistry that affects each of us occurs among substances dissolved
in water. For example, virtually all the chemistry that makes life possible occurs in an
aqueous environment. Also, various medical tests involve aqueous reactions, depending
heavily on analyses of blood and other body ﬂuids. In addition to the common tests for
sugar, cholesterol, and iron, analyses for speciﬁc chemical markers allow detection of
many diseases before obvious symptoms occur.
Aqueous chemistry is also important in our environment. In recent years, contamination of the groundwater by substances such as chloroform and nitrates has been widely
publicized. Water is essential for life, and the maintenance of an ample supply of clean
water is crucial to all civilization.
To understand the chemistry that occurs in such diverse places as the human body,
the atmosphere, the groundwater, the oceans, the local water treatment plant, your hair as
you shampoo it, and so on, we must understand how substances dissolved in water react
with each other.
However, before we can understand solution reactions, we need to discuss the nature
of solutions in which water is the dissolving medium, or solvent. These solutions are called
aqueous solutions. In this chapter we will study the nature of materials after they are dissolved in water and various types of reactions that occur among these substances. You
will see that the procedures developed in Chapter 3 to deal with chemical reactions work
very well for reactions that take place in aqueous solutions. To understand the types of
reactions that occur in aqueous solutions, we must ﬁrst explore the types of species present.
This requires an understanding of the nature of water.

4.1

Water, the Common Solvent

Water is one of the most important substances on earth. It is essential for sustaining the
reactions that keep us alive, but it also affects our lives in many indirect ways. Water
helps moderate the earth’s temperature; it cools automobile engines, nuclear power
plants, and many industrial processes; it provides a means of transportation on the
earth’s surface and a medium for the growth of a myriad of creatures we use as food;
and much more.
One of the most valuable properties of water is its ability to dissolve many different
substances. For example, salt “disappears” when you sprinkle it into the water used to
cook vegetables, as does sugar when you add it to your iced tea. In each case the “disappearing” substance is obviously still present—you can taste it. What happens when a
solid dissolves? To understand this process, we need to consider the nature of water. Liquid
water consists of a collection of H2O molecules. An individual H2O molecule is “bent”
or V-shaped, with an HOOOH angle of approximately 105 degrees:
H

105˚

H

O
The OOH bonds in the water molecule are covalent bonds formed by electron sharing between the oxygen and hydrogen atoms. However, the electrons of the bond are not
shared equally between these atoms. For reasons we will discuss in later chapters, oxygen has a greater attraction for electrons than does hydrogen. If the electrons were shared
equally between the two atoms, both would be electrically neutral because, on average,
the number of electrons around each would equal the number of protons in that nucleus.

127

128

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
δ+

However, because the oxygen atom has a greater attraction for electrons, the shared
electrons tend to spend more time close to the oxygen than to either of the hydrogens.
Thus the oxygen atom gains a slight excess of negative charge, and the hydrogen atoms
become slightly positive. This is shown in Fig. 4.1, where ␦ (delta) indicates a partial
charge (less than one unit of charge). Because of this unequal charge distribution, water
is said to be a polar molecule. It is this polarity that gives water its great ability to dissolve
compounds.
A schematic of an ionic solid dissolving in water is shown in Fig. 4.2. Note that the
“positive ends” of the water molecules are attracted to the negatively charged anions and
that the “negative ends” are attracted to the positively charged cations. This process is
called hydration. The hydration of its ions tends to cause a salt to “fall apart” in the water, or to dissolve. The strong forces present among the positive and negative ions of the
solid are replaced by strong water–ion interactions.
It is very important to recognize that when ionic substances (salts) dissolve in water,
they break up into the individual cations and anions. For instance, when ammonium nitrate
(NH4NO3) dissolves in water, the resulting solution contains NH4 and NO3 ions moving
around independently. This process can be represented as

H

2δ –

O

105˚

H
δ+

FIGURE 4.1
(top) The water molecule is polar. (bottom)
A space-ﬁlling model of the water molecule.

H O1l 2

2
NH4NO3 1s2 –¡ NH4  1aq2  NO3 1aq2

where (aq) designates that the ions are hydrated by unspeciﬁed numbers of water molecules.
The solubility of ionic substances in water varies greatly. For example, sodium chloride is quite soluble in water, whereas silver chloride (contains Ag and Cl ions) is only
very slightly soluble. The differences in the solubilities of ionic compounds in water
typically depend on the relative attractions of the ions for each other (these forces hold
the solid together) and the attractions of the ions for water molecules (which cause the
solid to disperse [dissolve] in water). Solubility is a complex topic that we will explore
in much more detail in Chapter 11. However, the most important thing to remember at

Visualization: The Dissolution
of a Solid in a Liquid

Anion

–

+
–

+

+

–

δ+

–

2δ –

–

+

+

–

δ+

–

+

+

+

–

–

–

+

+

+

+
–
–

2δ –
δ+

+

δ+
Cation

FIGURE 4.2
Polar water molecules interact with the positive and negative ions of a salt, assisting in the dissolving process.

4.2 The Nature of Aqueous Solutions: Strong and Weak Electrolytes

129

H
δ–

FIGURE 4.3
(a) The ethanol molecule contains a polar
O—H bond similar to those in the water
molecule. (b) The polar water molecule
interacts strongly with the polar O—H
bond in ethanol. This is a case of “like
dissolving like.”

H

O

H C
H
(a)

H

H
H

O

C H

H C

C H

H

H

H

δ+
Polar bond

O
H

(b)

this point is that when an ionic solid does dissolve in water, the ions become hydrated
and are dispersed (move around independently).
Water also dissolves many nonionic substances. Ethanol (C2H5OH), for example, is
very soluble in water. Wine, beer, and mixed drinks are aqueous solutions of ethanol and
other substances. Why is ethanol so soluble in water? The answer lies in the structure of
the alcohol molecules, which is shown in Fig. 4.3(a). The molecule contains a polar OOH
bond like those in water, which makes it very compatible with water. The interaction of
water with ethanol is represented in Fig. 4.3(b).
Many substances do not dissolve in water. Pure water will not, for example, dissolve
animal fat, because fat molecules are nonpolar and do not interact effectively with polar
water molecules. In general, polar and ionic substances are expected to be more soluble
in water than nonpolar substances. “Like dissolves like” is a useful rule for predicting solubility. We will explore the basis for this generalization when we discuss the details of
solution formation in Chapter 11.

4.2

Visualization: Electrolytes

An electrolyte is a substance that when
dissolved in water produces a solution
that can conduct electricity.

Visualization: Electrolyte
Behavior

The Nature of Aqueous Solutions: Strong and
Weak Electrolytes

As we discussed in Chapter 2, a solution is a homogeneous mixture. It is the same throughout (the ﬁrst sip of a cup of coffee is the same as the last), but its composition can be
varied by changing the amount of dissolved substances (one can make weak or strong coffee). In this section we will consider what happens when a substance, the solute, is
dissolved in liquid water, the solvent.
One useful property for characterizing a solution is its electrical conductivity, its ability to conduct an electric current. This characteristic can be checked conveniently by using an apparatus like the ones shown in Figure 4.4. If the solution in the container conducts
electricity, the bulb lights. Pure water is not an electrical conductor. However, some aqueous solutions conduct current very efﬁciently, and the bulb shines very brightly; these solutions contain strong electrolytes. Other solutions conduct only a small current, and the
bulb glows dimly; these solutions contain weak electrolytes. Some solutions permit no
current to ﬂow, and the bulb remains unlit; these solutions contain nonelectrolytes.
The basis for the conductivity properties of solutions was ﬁrst correctly identiﬁed by
Svante Arrhenius (1859–1927), then a Swedish graduate student in physics, who carried
out research on the nature of solutions at the University of Uppsala in the early 1880s.
Arrhenius came to believe that the conductivity of solutions arose from the presence of
ions, an idea that was at ﬁrst scorned by the majority of the scientiﬁc establishment. However, in the late 1890s when atoms were found to contain charged particles, the ionic
theory suddenly made sense and became widely accepted.
As Arrhenius postulated, the extent to which a solution can conduct an electric current
depends directly on the number of ions present. Some materials, such as sodium chloride,
readily produce ions in aqueous solution and thus are strong electrolytes. Other substances,

130

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

FIGURE 4.4
Electrical conductivity of aqueous solutions.
The circuit will be completed and will allow
current to ﬂow only when there are charge
carriers (ions) in the solution. Note: Water
molecules are present but not shown in
these pictures. (a) A hydrochloric acid solution, which is a strong electrolyte, contains
ions that readily conduct the current and
give a brightly lit bulb. (b) An acetic acid
solution, which is a weak electrolyte, contains only a few ions and does not conduct
as much current as a strong electrolyte.
The bulb is only dimly lit. (c) A sucrose
solution, which is a nonelectrolyte, contains
no ions and does not conduct a current.
The bulb remains unlit.

+

–
+
–

–

–
+

+

+
–

–
+

(a)

(b)

(c)

such as acetic acid, produce relatively few ions when dissolved in water and are weak
electrolytes. A third class of materials, such as sugar, form virtually no ions when dissolved
in water and are nonelectrolytes.

Strong Electrolytes
Strong electrolytes are substances that are completely ionized when they are dissolved in
water, as represented in Fig. 4.4(a). We will consider several classes of strong electrolytes:
(1) soluble salts, (2) strong acids, and (3) strong bases.
As shown in Fig. 4.2, a salt consists of an array of cations and anions that separate
and become hydrated when the salt dissolves. For example, when NaCl dissolves in water,
it produces hydrated Na and Cl ions in the solution (see Fig. 4.5). Virtually no NaCl

NaCl(s)
dissolves

FIGURE 4.5
When solid NaCl dissolves, the Na and
Cl ions are randomly dispersed in the
water.

Na+

Cl–

4.2 The Nature of Aqueous Solutions: Strong and Weak Electrolytes

+

–
+

+

+

–

–
–

–

+

–
–
+

+

+

+

–

–

–
+

+ H+
– Cl–

units are present. Thus NaCl is a strong electrolyte. It is important to recognize that these
aqueous solutions contain millions of water molecules that we will not include in our
molecular-level drawings.
One of Arrhenius’s most important discoveries concerned the nature of acids. Acidity was ﬁrst associated with the sour taste of citrus fruits. In fact, the word acid comes
directly from the Latin word acidus, meaning “sour.” The mineral acids sulfuric acid
(H2SO4) and nitric acid (HNO3), so named because they were originally obtained by the
treatment of minerals, were discovered around 1300.
Although acids were known for hundreds of years before the time of Arrhenius, no
one had recognized their essential nature. In his studies of solutions, Arrhenius found that
when the substances HCl, HNO3, and H2SO4 were dissolved in water, they behaved as
strong electrolytes. He postulated that this was the result of ionization reactions in water,
for example:
HCl ¡ H 1aq2  Cl 1aq2
H2O
HNO3 ¡ H 1aq2  NO3 1aq2
H2O
H2SO4 ¡ H 1aq2  HSO4 1aq2
H2O

FIGURE 4.6
HCl(aq) is completely ionized.

The Arrhenius deﬁnition of an acid is a
substance that produces H ions in
solution.
Strong electrolytes dissociate (ionize)
completely in aqueous solution.
Perchloric acid, HClO4(aq), is another
strong acid.

131

Thus Arrhenius proposed that an acid is a substance that produces H ions (protons) when
it is dissolved in water.
Studies of conductivity show that when HCl, HNO3, and H2SO4 are placed in
water, virtually every molecule ionizes. These substances are strong electrolytes and
are thus called strong acids. All three are very important chemicals, and much more
will be said about them as we proceed. However, at this point the following facts are
important:
Sulfuric acid, nitric acid, and hydrochloric acid are aqueous solutions and should be
written in chemical equations as H2SO4(aq), HNO3(aq), and HCl(aq), respectively,
although they often appear without the (aq) symbol.
A strong acid is one that completely dissociates into its ions. Thus, if 100 molecules
of HCl are dissolved in water, 100 H ions and 100 Cl ions are produced. Virtually
no HCl molecules exist in aqueous solutions (see Fig. 4.6).

+

–

+

+

–

–

–

+
–

–

+
–

–

+

+

+

+

–

–

–

+

Sulfuric acid is a special case. The formula H2SO4 indicates that this acid can produce two H ions per molecule when dissolved in water. However, only the ﬁrst H
ion is completely dissociated. The second H ion can be pulled off under certain conditions, which we will discuss later. Thus an aqueous solution of H2SO4 contains
mostly H ions and HSO4 ions.
Another important class of strong electrolytes consists of the strong bases, soluble
ionic compounds containing the hydroxide ion (OH). When these compounds are dissolved in water, the cations and OH ions separate and move independently. Solutions
containing bases have a bitter taste and a slippery feel. The most common basic solutions
are those produced when solid sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or potassium hydroxide (KOH)
is dissolved in water to produce ions, as follows (see Fig. 4.7):

OH –

NaOH1s2 ¡ Na 1aq2  OH 1aq2
H2O
KOH1s2 ¡ K 1aq2  OH 1aq2
H2O

+– Na+

FIGURE 4.7
An aqueous solution of sodium
hydroxide.

Weak electrolytes dissociate (ionize) only
to a small extent in aqueous solution.

Weak Electrolytes
Weak electrolytes are substances that exhibit a small degree of ionization in water. That
is, they produce relatively few ions when dissolved in water, as shown in Fig. 4.4(b). The
most common weak electrolytes are weak acids and weak bases.

132

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Arrhenius: A Man with Solutions
cience is a human endeavor, subject to human frailties
and governed by personalities, politics, and prejudices.
One of the best illustrations of the often bumpy path of the
advancement of scientiﬁc knowledge is the story of Swedish
chemist Svante Arrhenius.
When Arrhenius began studies toward his doctorate
at the University of Uppsala around 1880, he chose to investigate the passage of electricity through solutions, a
mystery that had bafﬂed scientists for a century. The ﬁrst
experiments had been done in the 1770s by Cavendish, who
compared the conductivity of salt solution with that of rain
water using his own physiologic reaction to the electric
shocks he received! Arrhenius had an array of instruments
to measure electric current, but the process of carefully
weighing, measuring, and recording data from a multitude
of experiments was a tedious one.
After his long series of experiments was performed,
Arrhenius quit his laboratory bench and returned to his country

S

Svante August Arrhenius.

The main acidic component of vinegar is acetic acid (HC2H3O2). The formula is
written to indicate that acetic acid has two chemically distinct types of hydrogen atoms.
Formulas for acids are often written with the acidic hydrogen atom or atoms (any that
will produce H ions in solution) listed ﬁrst. If any nonacidic hydrogens are present, they
are written later in the formula. Thus the formula HC2H3O2 indicates one acidic and three
nonacidic hydrogen atoms. The dissociation reaction for acetic acid in water can be written as follows:
HC2H3O2 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C2H3O2 1aq2
H2O

–

+

Hydrogen
Oxygen
Carbon

FIGURE 4.8
Acetic acid (HC2H3O2) exists in water mostly
as undissociated molecules. Only a small
percentage of the molecules are ionized.

Acetic acid is very different from the strong acids because only about 1% of its molecules
dissociate in aqueous solutions at typical concentrations. For example, in a solution containing 0.1 mole of HC2H3O2 per liter, for every 100 molecules of HC2H3O2 originally
dissolved in water, approximately 99 molecules of HC2H3O2 remain intact (see Fig. 4.8).
That is, only one molecule out of every 100 dissociates (to produce one H ion and one
C2H3O2 ion).
Because acetic acid is a weak electrolyte, it is called a weak acid. Any acid, such
as acetic acid, that dissociates (ionizes) only to a slight extent in aqueous solutions
is called a weak acid. In Chapter 14 we will explore the subject of weak acids in
detail.
The most common weak base is ammonia (NH3). When ammonia is dissolved in
water, it reacts as follows:
NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ¡ NH4  1aq2  OH 1aq2
The solution is basic because OH ions are produced. Ammonia is called a weak base
because the resulting solution is a weak electrolyte; that is, very few ions are formed. In
fact, in a solution containing 0.1 mole of NH3 per liter, for every 100 molecules of NH3

4.3 The Composition of Solutions

home to try to formulate a model that could account for his
data. He wrote, “I got the idea in the night of the 17th of May
in the year 1883, and I could not sleep that night until I had
worked through the whole problem.” His idea was that ions
were responsible for conducting electricity through a solution.
Back at Uppsala, Arrhenius took his doctoral dissertation containing the new theory to his advisor, Professor
Cleve, an eminent chemist and the discoverer of the elements holmium and thulium. Cleve’s uninterested response
was what Arrhenius had expected. It was in keeping with
Cleve’s resistance to new ideas—he had not even accepted
Mendeleev’s periodic table, introduced 10 years earlier.
It is a long-standing custom that before a doctoral degree is granted, the dissertation must be defended before a
panel of professors. Although this procedure is still followed
at most universities today, the problems are usually worked
out in private with the evaluating professors before the actual
defense. However, when Arrhenius did it, the dissertation
defense was an open debate, which could be rancorous and
humiliating. Knowing that it would be unwise to antagonize
his professors, Arrhenius downplayed his convictions about

133

his new theory as he defended his dissertation. His diplomacy paid off: He was awarded his degree, albeit reluctantly,
because the professors still did not believe his model and
considered him to be a marginal scientist, at best.
Such a setback could have ended his scientiﬁc career,
but Arrhenius was a crusader; he was determined to see his
theory triumph. He promptly embarked on a political campaign, enlisting the aid of several prominent scientists, to
get his theory accepted.
Ultimately, the ionic theory triumphed. Arrhenius’s fame
spread, and honors were heaped on him, culminating in the
Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1903. Not one to rest on his laurels, Arrhenius turned to new ﬁelds, including astronomy; he
formulated a new theory that the solar system may have come
into being through the collision of stars. His exceptional versatility led him to study the use of serums to ﬁght disease,
energy resources and conservation, and the origin of life.
Additional insight on Arrhenius and his scientiﬁc career can be
obtained from his address on receiving the Willard Gibbs Award.
See Journal of the American Chemical Society 36 (1912): 353.

originally dissolved, only one NH4 ion and one OH ion are produced; 99 molecules of
NH3 remain unreacted (see Fig. 4.9).

Nonelectrolytes

–
+

Hydrogen
Oxygen
Nitrogen

FIGURE 4.9
The reaction of NH3 in water.

Nonelectrolytes are substances that dissolve in water but do not produce any ions, as shown in
Fig. 4.4(c). An example of a nonelectrolyte is ethanol (see Fig. 4.3 for the structural formula).
When ethanol dissolves, entire C2H5OH molecules are dispersed in the water. Since the
molecules do not break up into ions, the resulting solution does not conduct an electric current.
Another common nonelectrolyte is table sugar (sucrose, C12H22O11), which is very soluble in
water but which produces no ions when it dissolves. The sucrose molecules remain intact.

4.3

The Composition of Solutions

Chemical reactions often take place when two solutions are mixed. To perform stoichiometric calculations in such cases, we must know two things: (1) the nature of the reaction, which depends on the exact forms the chemicals take when dissolved, and (2) the
amounts of chemicals present in the solutions, usually expressed as concentrations.
The concentration of a solution can be described in many different ways, as we will
see in Chapter 11. At this point we will consider only the most commonly used expression
of concentration, molarity (M), which is deﬁned as moles of solute per volume of solution
in liters:
M  molarity 

moles of solute
liters of solution

A solution that is 1.0 molar (written as 1.0 M) contains 1.0 mole of solute per liter of solution.

134

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
Sample Exercise 4.1

Calculation of Molarity I
Calculate the molarity of a solution prepared by dissolving 11.5 g of solid NaOH in enough
water to make 1.50 L of solution.
Solution
To ﬁnd the molarity of the solution, we ﬁrst compute the number of moles of solute using
the molar mass of NaOH (40.00 g/mol):
11.5 g NaOH 

1 mol NaOH
 0.288 mol NaOH
40.00 g NaOH

Then we divide by the volume of the solution in liters:
Molarity 

mol solute
0.288 mol NaOH

 0.192 M NaOH
L solution
1.50 L solution
See Exercises 4.21 and 4.22.

Sample Exercise 4.2

Calculation of Molarity II
Calculate the molarity of a solution prepared by dissolving 1.56 g of gaseous HCl in
enough water to make 26.8 mL of solution.
Solution
First we calculate the number of moles of HCl (molar mass  36.46 g/mol):
1.56 g HCl 

1 mol HCl
 4.28  102 mol HCl
36.46 g HCl

Next we must change the volume of the solution to liters:
26.8 mL 

1L
 2.68  102 L
1000 mL

Finally, we divide the moles of solution by the liters of solution:
Molarity 

4.28  102 mol HCl
 1.60 M HCl
2.68  102 L solution
See Exercises 4.21 and 4.22.

It is important to realize that the conventional description of a solution’s concentration
may not accurately reﬂect the true composition of the solution. Solution concentration is
always given in terms of the form of the solute before it dissolves. For example, when a
solution is described as being 1.0 M NaCl, this means that the solution was prepared by
dissolving 1.0 mole of solid NaCl in enough water to make 1.0 liter of solution; it does
not mean that the solution contains 1.0 mole of NaCl units. Actually, the solution contains
1.0 mole of Na ions and 1.0 mole of Cl ions. This situation is further illustrated in
Sample Exercise 4.3.

Sample Exercise 4.3

Concentrations of Ions I
Give the concentration of each type of ion in the following solutions:
a. 0.50 M Co(NO3)2
b. 1 M Fe(ClO4)3

4.3 The Composition of Solutions

135

Solution
a. When solid Co(NO3)2 dissolves, the cobalt(II) cation and the nitrate anions separate:
Co1NO3 2 2 1s2 ¡ Co2 1aq2  2NO3 1aq2
H2O

For each mole of Co(NO3)2 that is dissolved, the solution contains 1 mol Co2 ions
and 2 mol NO3 ions. Thus a solution that is 0.50 M Co(NO3)2 contains 0.50 M Co2
and (2  0.50) M NO3 or 1.0 M NO3.
b. When solid Fe(ClO4)3 dissolves, the iron(III) cation and the perchlorate anions separate:
Fe1ClO4 2 3 1s2 ¡ Fe3 1aq2  3ClO4 1aq2
H2O

Thus a solution that is described as 1 M Fe(ClO4)3 actually contains 1 M Fe3 ions and
3 M ClO4 ions.
See Exercises 14.23 and 14.24.

An aqueous solution of Co(NO3)2.

Often chemists need to determine the number of moles of solute present in a given
volume of a solution of known molarity. The procedure for doing this is easily derived
from the deﬁnition of molarity. If we multiply the molarity of a solution by the volume
(in liters) of a particular sample of the solution, we get the moles of solute present in that
sample:
Liters of solution  molarity  liters of solution 

M

moles of solute
liters of solution

Sample Exercise 4.4

moles of solute
 moles of solute
liters of solution

This procedure is demonstrated in Sample Exercises 4.4 and 4.5.

Concentrations of Ions II
Calculate the number of moles of Cl ions in 1.75 L of 1.0  103 M ZnCl2.
Solution
When solid ZnCl2 dissolves, it produces ions as follows:
ZnCl2 1s2 ¡ Zn2 1aq2  2Cl 1aq2
H2O

Thus a 1.0  103 M ZnCl2 solution contains 1.0  103 M Zn2 ions and 2.0  103
M Cl ions. To calculate the moles of Cl ions in 1.75 L of the 1.0  103 M ZnCl2 solution, we must multiply the volume times the molarity:
1.75 L solution  2.0  103 M Cl  1.75 L solution 

2.0  103 mol Cl
L solution

 3.5  103 mol Cl

See Exercise 4.25.
Sample Exercise 4.5

Concentration and Volume
Typical blood serum is about 0.14 M NaCl. What volume of blood contains 1.0 mg NaCl?
Solution
We must ﬁrst determine the number of moles represented by 1.0 mg NaCl (molar mass 
58.45 g/mol):
1.0 mg NaCl 

1 g NaCl
1 mol NaCl

 1.7  105 mol NaCl
1000 mg NaCl
58.45 g NaCl

136

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
Next, we must determine what volume of 0.14 M NaCl solution contains 1.7  105 mol
NaCl. There is some volume, call it V, that when multiplied by the molarity of this solution will yield 1.7  105 mol NaCl. That is:
V

0.14 mol NaCl
 1.7  105 mol NaCl
L solution

We want to solve for the volume:
V

1.7  105 mol NaCl
 1.2  104 L solution
0.14 mol NaCl
L solution

Thus 0.12 mL of blood contains 1.7  105 mol NaCl or 1.0 mg NaCl.
See Exercises 4.27 and 4.28.
A standard solution is a solution whose concentration is accurately known. Standard solutions, often used in chemical analysis, can be prepared as shown in Fig. 4.10 and
in Sample Exercise 4.6.
Sample Exercise 4.6

Solutions of Known Concentration
To analyze the alcohol content of a certain wine, a chemist needs 1.00 L of an aqueous
0.200 M K2Cr2O7 (potassium dichromate) solution. How much solid K2Cr2O7 must be
weighed out to make this solution?
Solution
We must ﬁrst determine the moles of K2Cr2O7 required:
1.00 L solution 

0.200 mol K2Cr2O7
 0.200 mol K2Cr2O7
L solution

Wash bottle

Volume marker
(calibration mark)

Weighed
amount
of solute

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIGURE 4.10
Steps involved in the preparation of a standard aqueous solution. (a) Put a weighed amount of a substance
(the solute) into the volumetric ﬂask, and add a small quantity of water. (b) Dissolve the solid in the water
by gently swirling the ﬂask (with the stopper in place). (c) Add more water (with gentle swirling) until the
level of the solution just reaches the mark etched on the neck of the ﬂask. Then mix the solution
thoroughly by inverting the ﬂask several times.

4.3 The Composition of Solutions

137

This amount can be converted to grams using the molar mass of K2Cr2O7 (294.18 g/mol).
0.200 mol K2Cr2O7 

294.20 g K2Cr2O7
 58.8 g K2Cr2O7
mol K2Cr2O7

Thus, to make 1.00 L of 0.200 M K2Cr2O7, the chemist must weigh out 58.8 g K2Cr2O7,
transfer it to a 1.00-L volumetric ﬂask, and add distilled water to the mark on the ﬂask.
See Exercises 4.29a and c and 4.30c and e.

Dilution
Visualization: Dilution

Dilution with water does not alter the
numbers of moles of solute present.

To save time and space in the laboratory, routinely used solutions are often purchased or
prepared in concentrated form (called stock solutions). Water is then added to achieve the
molarity desired for a particular solution. This process is called dilution. For example,
the common acids are purchased as concentrated solutions and diluted as needed. A typical dilution calculation involves determining how much water must be added to an amount
of stock solution to achieve a solution of the desired concentration. The key to doing these
calculations is to remember that
Moles of solute after dilution  moles of solute before dilution
because only water (no solute) is added to accomplish the dilution.
For example, suppose we need to prepare 500. mL of 1.00 M acetic acid (HC2H3O2)
from a 17.4 M stock solution of acetic acid. What volume of the stock solution is required?
The ﬁrst step is to determine the number of moles of acetic acid in the ﬁnal solution by
multiplying the volume by the molarity (remembering that the volume must be changed
to liters):
500. mL solution 

Calibration
mark

1.00 mol HC2H3O2
1 L solution

 0.500 mol HC2H3O2
1000 mL solution
L solution

Thus we need to use a volume of 17.4 M acetic acid that contains 0.500 mol HC2H3O2.
That is,
V

17.4 mol HC2H3O2
 0.500 mol HC2H3O2
L solution

Solving for V gives
V

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 4.11
(a) A measuring pipet is graduated and can
be used to measure various volumes of
liquid accurately. (b) A volumetric (transfer)
pipet is designed to measure one volume
accurately. When ﬁlled to the mark, it delivers the volume indicated on the pipet.

0.500 mol HC2H3O2
 0.0287 L or 28.7 mL solution
17.4 mol HC2H3O2
L solution

Thus, to make 500 mL of a 1.00 M acetic acid solution, we can take 28.7 mL of 17.4 M
acetic acid and dilute it to a total volume of 500 mL with distilled water.
A dilution procedure typically involves two types of glassware: a pipet and a
volumetric ﬂask. A pipet is a device for accurately measuring and transferring a given
volume of solution. There are two common types of pipets: volumetric (or transfer)
pipets and measuring pipets, as shown in Fig. 4.11. Volumetric pipets come in speciﬁc
sizes, such as 5 mL, 10 mL, 25 mL, and so on. Measuring pipets are used to measure
volumes for which a volumetric pipet is not available. For example, we would use a
measuring pipet as shown in Fig. 4.12 on page 139 to deliver 28.7 mL of 17.4 M acetic
acid into a 500-mL volumetric ﬂask and then add water to the mark to perform the
dilution described above.

138

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Tiny Laboratories
ne of the major impacts of modern technology is to
make things smaller. The best example is the computer.
Calculations that 30 years ago required a machine the size
of a large room now can be carried out on a hand-held calculator. This tendency toward miniaturization is also having
a major impact on the science of chemical analysis. Using
the techniques of computer chip makers, researchers are now
constructing minuscule laboratories on the surface of a tiny
chip made of silicon, glass, or plastic (see photo). Instead
of electrons, 106 to 109 L of liquids moves between reaction chambers on the chip through tiny capillaries. The
chips typically contain no moving parts. Instead of conventional pumps, the chip-based laboratories use voltage differences to move liquids that contain ions from one reaction
chamber to another.
Microchip laboratories have many advantages. They
require only tiny amounts of sample. This is especially advantageous for expensive, difﬁcult-to-prepare materials or in
cases such as criminal investigations, where only small
amounts of evidence may exist. The chip laboratories also
minimize contamination because they represent a “closed
system” once the material has been introduced to the chip.
In addition, the chips can be made to be disposable to prevent
cross-contamination of different samples.
The chip laboratories present some difﬁculties not found
in macroscopic laboratories. The main problem concerns the
large surface area of the capillaries and reaction chambers
relative to the sample volume. Molecules or biological cells
in the sample solution encounter so much “wall” that they
may undergo unwanted reactions with the wall materials.
Glass seems to present the least of these problems, and
the walls of silicon chip laboratories can be protected by
formation of relatively inert silicon dioxide. Because plastic is inexpensive, it seems a good choice for disposable
chips, but plastic also is the most reactive with the samples
and the least durable of the available materials.

O

Sample Exercise 4.7

Caliper Technologies Corporation, of Palo Alto, California, is working toward creating a miniature chemistry
laboratory about the size of a toaster that can be used with
“plug-in” chip-based laboratories. Various chips would be
furnished with the unit that would be appropriate for different types of analyses. The entire unit would be connected to
a computer to collect and analyze the data. There is even the
possibility that these “laboratories” could be used in the
home to perform analyses such as blood sugar and blood
cholesterol and to check for the presence of bacteria such
as E. coli and many others. This would revolutionize the
health care industry.

Plastic chips such as this one made by
Caliper Technologies are being used to perform laboratory procedures traditionally
done with test tubes.

Adapted from “The Incredible Shrinking Laboratory,” by Corinna
Wu, as appeared in Science News, Vol. 154, August 15, 1998, p. 104.

Concentration and Volume
What volume of 16 M sulfuric acid must be used to prepare 1.5 L of a 0.10 M H2SO4 solution?
Solution
We must ﬁrst determine the moles of H2SO4 in 1.5 L of 0.10 M H2SO4:
1.5 L solution 

0.10 mol H2SO4
 0.15 mol H2SO4
L solution

4.3 The Composition of Solutions

139

Rubber bulb

FIGURE 4.12
(a) A measuring pipet is used to transfer
28.7 mL of 17.4 M acetic acid solution to a
volumetric ﬂask. (b) Water is added to the
ﬂask to the calibration mark. (c) The resulting solution is 1.00 M acetic acid.

500 mL

(a)

(b)

(c)

Next we must ﬁnd the volume of 16 M H2SO4 that contains 0.15 mol H2SO4:
V

16 mol H2SO4
 0.15 mol H2SO4
L solution

Solving for V gives
V

In diluting an acid, “Do what you oughta,
always add acid to water.”

0.15 mol H2SO4
 9.4  103 L or 9.4 mL solution
16 mol H2SO4
1 L solution

Thus, to make 1.5 L of 0.10 M H2SO4 using 16 M H2SO4, we must take 9.4 mL of the concentrated acid and dilute it with water to 1.5 L. The correct way to do this is to add the 9.4 mL
of acid to about 1 L of distilled water and then dilute to 1.5 L by adding more water.
See Exercises 4.29b and d and 4.30a, b, and d.

As noted earlier, the central idea in performing the calculations associated with dilutions is to recognize that the moles of solute are not changed by the dilution. Another way
to express this condition is by the following equation:
M1V1  M2V2
where M1 and V1 represent the molarity and volume of the original solution (before dilution) and M2 and V2 represent the molarity and volume of the diluted solution. This equation makes sense because
M1  V1  mol solute before dilution
 mol solute after dilution  M2  V2

140

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
Repeat Sample Exercise 4.7 using the equation M1V1  M2V2. Note that in doing so
M1  16 M

M2  0.10 M

V2  1.5 L

and V1 is the unknown quantity sought. The equation M1V1  M2V2 always holds for a dilution. This equation will be easy for you to remember if you understand where it comes from.

4.4

Types of Chemical Reactions

Although we have considered many reactions so far in this text, we have examined only
a tiny fraction of the millions of possible chemical reactions. To make sense of all these
reactions, we need some system for grouping reactions into classes. Although there are
many different ways to do this, we will use the system most commonly used by practicing chemists:

Types of Solution Reactions
䊉

Precipitation reactions

䊉

Acid–base reactions

䊉

Oxidation–reduction reactions

Virtually all reactions can be put into one of these classes. We will deﬁne and illustrate
each type in the following sections.

4.5
FIGURE 4.13
When yellow aqueous potassium chromate
is added to a colorless barium nitrate solution, yellow barium chromate precipitates.

A precipitation reaction also can be called
a double displacement reaction.

Visualization: Precipitation
Reactions
The quantitative aspects of precipitation
reactions are covered in Chapter 15.
When ionic compounds dissolve in water,
the resulting solution contains the separated ions.

Precipitation Reactions

When two solutions are mixed, an insoluble substance sometimes forms; that is, a solid
forms and separates from the solution. Such a reaction is called a precipitation reaction,
and the solid that forms is called a precipitate. For example, a precipitation reaction occurs
when an aqueous solution of potassium chromate, K2CrO4(aq), which is yellow, is added
to a colorless aqueous solution containing barium nitrate, Ba(NO3)2(aq). As shown in
Fig. 4.13, when these solutions are mixed, a yellow solid forms. What is the equation that
describes this chemical change? To write the equation, we must know the identities of the
reactants and products. The reactants have already been described: K2CrO4(aq) and
Ba(NO3)2(aq). Is there some way we can predict the identities of the products? In particular, what is the yellow solid?
The best way to predict the identity of this solid is to think carefully about what products are possible. To do this, we need to know what species are present in the solution
after the two reactant solutions are mixed. First, let’s think about the nature of each reactant
solution. The designation Ba(NO3)2(aq) means that barium nitrate (a white solid) has been
dissolved in water. Notice that barium nitrate contains the Ba2 and NO3 ions. Remember: In virtually every case, when a solid containing ions dissolves in water, the ions
separate and move around independently. That is, Ba(NO3)2(aq) does not contain Ba(NO3)2
units; it contains separated Ba2 and NO3 ions. See Fig. 4.14(a).
Similarly, since solid potassium chromate contains the K and CrO42 ions, an aqueous solution of potassium chromate (which is prepared by dissolving solid K2CrO4 in
water) contains these separated ions, as shown in Fig. 4.14(b).
We can represent the mixing of K2CrO4(aq) and Ba(NO3)2(aq) in two ways. First, we
can write
K2CrO4 1aq2  Ba1NO3 2 2 1aq2 ¡ products

4.5 Precipitation Reactions

141

K+
Ba2+
NO3–

FIGURE 4.14
Reactant solutions: (a) Ba(NO3)2(aq) and
(b) K2CrO4(aq).

(a)

CrO42–

(b)

However, a much more accurate representation is
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

2K 1aq2  CrO42 1aq2  Ba2 1aq2  2NO3 1aq2 ¡ products
The ions in
K2CrO4(aq)

The ions in
Ba(NO3)2(aq)

Thus the mixed solution contains the ions:
K

CrO42

Ba2

NO3

as illustrated in Fig. 4.15(a).
How can some or all of these ions combine to form a yellow solid? This is not an
easy question to answer. In fact, predicting the products of a chemical reaction is one of
the hardest things a beginning chemistry student is asked to do. Even an experienced
chemist, when confronted with a new reaction, is often not sure what will happen.
The chemist tries to think of the various possibilities, considers the likelihood of each

K+
Ba2+
NO3–
CrO42–

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIGURE 4.15
The reaction of K2CrO4(aq) and Ba(NO3)2(aq). (a) The molecular-level “picture” of the mixed solution before any reaction has occurred.
(b) The molecular-level “picture” of the solution after the reaction has occurred to form BaCrO4(s). Note: BaCrO4(s) is not molecular. It
actually contains Ba2 and CrO42 ions packed together in a lattice. (c) A photo of the solution after the reaction has occurred, showing the solid BaCrO4 on the bottom.

142

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
possibility, and then makes a prediction (an educated guess). Only after identifying each
product experimentally is the chemist sure what reaction has taken place. However, an
educated guess is very useful because it provides a place to start. It tells us what kinds of
products we are most likely to ﬁnd. We already know some things that will help us predict
the products of the above reaction.
1. When ions form a solid compound, the compound must have a zero net charge. Thus
the products of this reaction must contain both anions and cations. For example, K
and Ba2 could not combine to form the solid, nor could CrO42 and NO3.
2. Most ionic materials contain only two types of ions: one type of cation and one type
of anion (for example, NaCl, KOH, Na2SO4, K2CrO4, Co(NO3)2, NH4Cl, Na2CO3).
The possible combinations of a given cation and a given anion from the list of ions
K, CrO42, Ba2, and NO3 are
K2CrO4

KNO3

Ba1NO3 2 2

BaCrO4

Which of these possibilities is most likely to represent the yellow solid? We know it’s not
K2CrO4 or Ba(NO3)2. They are the reactants. They were present (dissolved) in the separate solutions that were mixed. The only real possibilities for the solid that formed are
KNO3 and

BaCrO4

To decide which of these most likely represents the yellow solid, we need more facts. An
experienced chemist knows that the K ion and the NO3 ion are both colorless. Thus, if
the solid is KNO3, it should be white, not yellow. On the other hand, the CrO42 ion is
yellow (note in Fig. 4.14 that K2CrO4(aq) is yellow). Thus the yellow solid is almost certainly BaCrO4. Further tests show that this is the case.
So far we have determined that one product of the reaction between K2CrO4(aq) and
Ba(NO3)2(aq) is BaCrO4(s), but what happened to the K and NO3 ions? The answer is
that these ions are left dissolved in the solution; KNO3 does not form a solid when the
K and NO3 ions are present in this much water. In other words, if we took solid KNO3
and put it in the same quantity of water as is present in the mixed solution, it would dissolve. Thus, when we mix K2CrO4(aq) and Ba(NO3)2(aq), BaCrO4(s) forms, but KNO3 is
left behind in solution (we write it as KNO3(aq)). Thus the overall equation for this
precipitation reaction using the formulas of the reactants and products is
K2CrO4 1aq2  Ba1NO3 2 2 1aq2 ¡ BaCrO4 1s2  2KNO3 1aq2

As long as water is present, the KNO3 remains dissolved as separated ions. (See Fig. 4.15 to
help visualize what is happening in this reaction. Note the solid BaCrO4 on the bottom of the
container, while the K and NO3 ions remain dispersed in the solution.) If we removed the
solid BaCrO4 and then evaporated the water, white solid KNO3 would be obtained; the K
and NO3 ions would assemble themselves into solid KNO3 when the water is removed.
Now let’s consider another example. When an aqueous solution of silver nitrate is
added to an aqueous solution of potassium chloride, a white precipitate forms, as shown
in Fig. 4.16. We can represent what we know so far as
AgNO3 1aq2  KCl1aq2 ¡ unknown white solid

Remembering that when ionic substances dissolve in water, the ions separate, we can write
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

FIGURE 4.16
Precipitation of silver chloride by mixing
solutions of silver nitrate and potassium
chloride. The K and NO3 ions remain in
solution.

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

Ag, NO3  K, Cl ¡ Ag, NO3, K, Cl ¡ white solid
In silver
nitrate
solution

In potassium
chloride
solution

Combined solution,
before reaction

Since we know the white solid must contain both positive and negative ions, the possible
compounds that can be assembled from this collection of ions are
AgNO3

KCl

AgCl

KNO3

4.5 Precipitation Reactions

143

Solutions are mixed

Cl–

Ag+
+

NO3–

K

Ag+

FIGURE 4.17
Photos and accompanying molecular-level representations illustrating the reaction of KCl(aq) with AgNO3(aq) to form AgCl(s). Note that it is not
possible to have a photo of the mixed solution before the reaction occurs, because it is an imaginary step that we use to help visualize the
reaction. Actually, the reaction occurs immediately when the two solutions are mixed.

Visualization: Reactions of
Silver I

Since AgNO3 and KCl are the substances dissolved in the two reactant solutions, we know
that they do not represent the white solid product. Therefore, the only real possibilities are
AgCl and

KNO3

From the ﬁrst example considered, we know that KNO3 is quite soluble in water. Thus
solid KNO3 will not form when the reactant solids are mixed. The product must be AgCl(s)
(which can be proved by experiment to be true). The overall equation for the reaction now
can be written
AgNO3 1aq2  KCl1aq2 ¡ AgCl1s2  KNO3 1aq2
Figure 4.17 shows the result of mixing aqueous solutions of AgNO3 and KCl, including
a microscopic visualization of the reaction.
Notice that in these two examples we had to apply both concepts (solids must have
a zero net charge) and facts (KNO3 is very soluble in water, CrO42 is yellow, and so on).
Doing chemistry requires both understanding ideas and remembering key information. Predicting the identity of the solid product in a precipitation reaction requires knowledge of
the solubilities of common ionic substances. As an aid in predicting the products of precipitation reactions, some simple solubility rules are given in Table 4.1. You should memorize these rules.
The phrase slightly soluble used in the solubility rules in Table 4.1 means that the tiny
amount of solid that dissolves is not noticeable. The solid appears to be insoluble to the
naked eye. Thus the terms insoluble and slightly soluble are often used interchangeably.
Note that the information in Table 4.1 allows us to predict that AgCl is the white solid
formed when solutions of AgNO3 and KCl are mixed. Rules 1 and 2 indicate that KNO3
is soluble, and Rule 3 states that AgCl is insoluble.

144

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

TABLE 4.1

Simple Rules for the Solubility of Salts in Water

1. Most nitrate (NO3) salts are soluble.
2. Most salts containing the alkali metal ions (Li, Na, K, Cs, Rb) and the ammonium
ion (NH4) are soluble.
3. Most chloride, bromide, and iodide salts are soluble. Notable exceptions are salts containing the ions Ag, Pb2, and Hg22.

Visualization: Solubility Rules

4. Most sulfate salts are soluble. Notable exceptions are BaSO4, PbSO4, Hg2SO4, and
CaSO4.
5. Most hydroxide salts are only slightly soluble. The important soluble hydroxides are
NaOH and KOH. The compounds Ba(OH)2, Sr(OH)2, and Ca(OH)2 are marginally
soluble.
6. Most sulﬁde (S2), carbonate (CO32), chromate (CrO42), and phosphate (PO43) salts
are only slightly soluble.

When solutions containing ionic substances are mixed, it will be helpful in determining
the products if you think in terms of ion interchange. For example, in the preceding discussion
we considered the results of mixing AgNO3(aq) and KCl(aq). In determining the products,
we took the cation from one reactant and combined it with the anion of the other reactant:
Ag



NO3



K



Cl

¡

r
p
Possible
solid
products

To begin, focus on the ions in solution
before any reaction occurs.

Sample Exercise 4.8

The solubility rules in Table 4.1 allow us to predict whether either product forms as a solid.
The key to dealing with the chemistry of an aqueous solution is ﬁrst to focus on the
actual components of the solution before any reaction occurs and then to ﬁgure out how
these components will react with each other. Sample Exercise 4.8 illustrates this process
for three different reactions.

Predicting Reaction Products
Using the solubility rules in Table 4.1, predict what will happen when the following pairs
of solutions are mixed.
a. KNO3(aq) and BaCl2(aq)
b. Na2SO4(aq) and Pb(NO3)2(aq)
c. KOH(aq) and Fe(NO3)3(aq)
Solution
a. The formula KNO3(aq) represents an aqueous solution obtained by dissolving solid
KNO3 in water to form a solution containing the hydrated ions K(aq) and NO3(aq).
Likewise, BaCl2(aq) represents a solution formed by dissolving solid BaCl2 in water
to produce Ba2(aq) and Cl(aq). When these two solutions are mixed, the resulting
solution contains the ions K, NO3, Ba2, and Cl. All ions are hydrated, but the (aq)
is omitted for simplicity. To look for possible solid products, combine the cation from
one reactant with the anion from the other:
K

NO3


r

Lead sulfate is a white solid.


p

Possible
solid products

Ba2



Cl

¡

4.6 Describing Reactions in Solution

145

Note from Table 4.1 that the rules predict that both KCl and Ba(NO3)2 are soluble in
water. Thus no precipitate forms when KNO3(aq) and BaCl2(aq) are mixed. All the
ions remain dissolved in solution. No chemical reaction occurs.
b. Using the same procedures as in part a, we ﬁnd that the ions present in the combined
solution before any reaction occurs are Na, SO42, Pb2, and NO3. The possible salts
that could form precipitates are
Na



SO4 2



Pb2



NO3

¡

The compound NaNO3 is soluble, but PbSO4 is insoluble (see Rule 4 in Table 4.1).
When these solutions are mixed, PbSO4 will precipitate from the solution. The balanced
equation is
Na2SO4 1aq2  Pb1NO3 2 2 1aq2 ¡ PbSO4 1s2  2NaNO3 1aq2
Solid Fe(OH)3 forms when aqueous KOH
and Fe(NO3)3 are mixed.

c. The combined solution (before any reaction occurs) contains the ions K, OH, Fe3,
and NO3. The salts that might precipitate are KNO3 and Fe(OH)3. The solubility rules
in Table 4.1 indicate that both K and NO3 salts are soluble. However, Fe(OH)3 is
only slightly soluble (Rule 5) and hence will precipitate. The balanced equation is
3KOH1aq2  Fe1NO3 2 3 1aq2 ¡ Fe1OH2 3 1s2  3KNO3 1aq2
See Exercises 4.37 and 4.38.

4.6

Describing Reactions in Solution

In this section we will consider the types of equations used to represent reactions in
solution. For example, when we mix aqueous potassium chromate with aqueous barium
nitrate, a reaction occurs to form a precipitate (BaCrO4) and dissolved potassium nitrate.
So far we have written the overall or formula equation for this reaction:
K2CrO4 1aq2  Ba1NO3 2 2 1aq2 ¡ BaCrO4 1s2  2KNO3 1aq2
Although the formula equation shows the reactants and products of the reaction, it does
not give a correct picture of what actually occurs in solution. As we have seen, aqueous
solutions of potassium chromate, barium nitrate, and potassium nitrate contain individual
ions, not collections of ions, as implied by the formula equation. Thus the complete ionic
equation
A strong electrolyte is a substance that
completely breaks apart into ions when
dissolved in water.

Net ionic equations include only those
components that undergo changes in the
reaction.

2K 1aq2  CrO42 1aq2  Ba2 1aq2  2NO3 1aq2 ¡
BaCrO4 1s2  2K 1aq2  2NO3 1aq2
better represents the actual forms of the reactants and products in solution. In a complete
ionic equation, all substances that are strong electrolytes are represented as ions.
The complete ionic equation reveals that only some of the ions participate in the
reaction. The K and NO3 ions are present in solution both before and after the reaction. The ions that do not participate directly in the reaction are called spectator ions.
The ions that participate in this reaction are the Ba2 and CrO42 ions, which combine to
form solid BaCrO4:
Ba2 1aq2  CrO42 1aq2 ¡ BaCrO4 1s2
This equation, called the net ionic equation, includes only those solution components
directly involved in the reaction. Chemists usually write the net ionic equation for a reaction
in solution because it gives the actual forms of the reactants and products and includes
only the species that undergo a change.

146

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

Three Types of Equations Are Used to Describe Reactions in Solution

Sample Exercise 4.9

䊉

The formula equation gives the overall reaction stoichiometry but not necessarily the
actual forms of the reactants and products in solution.

䊉

The complete ionic equation represents as ions all reactants and products that are
strong electrolytes.

䊉

The net ionic equation includes only those solution components undergoing a change.
Spectator ions are not included.

Writing Equations for Reactions
For each of the following reactions, write the formula equation, the complete ionic equation, and the net ionic equation.
a. Aqueous potassium chloride is added to aqueous silver nitrate to form a silver chloride
precipitate plus aqueous potassium nitrate.
b. Aqueous potassium hydroxide is mixed with aqueous iron(III) nitrate to form a
precipitate of iron(III) hydroxide and aqueous potassium nitrate.
Solution
a. Formula Equation
KCl1aq2  AgNO3 1aq2 ¡ AgCl1s2  KNO3 1aq2
Complete Ionic Equation
(Remember: Any ionic compound dissolved in water will be present as the separated
ions.)
K 1aq2  Cl 1aq2  Ag 1aq2  NO3 1aq2 ¡ AgCl1s2  K 1aq2  NO3 1aq2

h
Spectator
ion

h
Spectator
ion

h
h
Solid,
Spectator
not written
ion
as separate ions

h
Spectator
ion

Canceling the spectator ions
K 1aq2  Cl 1aq2  Ag 1aq2  NO3 1aq2 ¡ AgCl1s2  K 1aq2  NO3 1aq2
gives the following net ionic equation.
Net Ionic Equation
Cl 1aq2  Ag 1aq2 ¡ AgCl1s2
b. Formula Equation
3KOH1aq2  Fe1NO3 2 3 1aq2 ¡ Fe1OH2 3 1s2  3KNO3 1aq2
Complete Ionic Equation
3K 1aq2  3OH 1aq2  Fe3 1aq2  3NO3 1aq2 ¡
Fe1OH2 3 1s2  3K 1aq2  3NO3 1aq2
Net Ionic Equation
3OH 1aq2  Fe3 1aq2 ¡ Fe1OH2 3 1s2
See Exercises 4.39 through 4.44.

4.7 Stoichiometry of Precipitation Reactions

4.7

147

Stoichiometry of Precipitation Reactions

In Chapter 3 we covered the principles of chemical stoichiometry: the procedures for calculating quantities of reactants and products involved in a chemical reaction. Recall that
in performing these calculations we ﬁrst convert all quantities to moles and then use the
coefﬁcients of the balanced equation to assemble the appropriate mole ratios. In cases
where reactants are mixed we must determine which reactant is limiting, since the reactant
that is consumed ﬁrst will limit the amounts of products formed. These same principles
apply to reactions that take place in solutions. However, two points about solution reactions
need special emphasis. The ﬁrst is that it is sometimes difﬁcult to tell immediately what
reaction will occur when two solutions are mixed. Usually we must do some thinking
about the various possibilities and then decide what probably will happen. The ﬁrst step
in this process always should be to write down the species that are actually present in the
solution, as we did in Section 4.5. The second special point about solution reactions is
that to obtain the moles of reactants we must use the volume of the solution and its molarity.
This procedure was covered in Section 4.3.
We will introduce stoichiometric calculations for reactions in solution in Sample
Exercise 4.10.

Sample Exercise 4.10

Determining the Mass of Product Formed
Calculate the mass of solid NaCl that must be added to 1.50 L of a 0.100 M AgNO3 solution to precipitate all the Ag ions in the form of AgCl.
Solution

Species present
Write the
reaction

Balanced net
ionic equation
Determine moles
of reactants

Identify limiting
reactant
Determine moles
of products

Check units
of products

When added to the AgNO3 solution (which contains Ag and NO3 ions), the solid NaCl
dissolves to yield Na and Cl ions. Thus the mixed solution contains the ions
Ag

NO3

Na

Cl

Note from Table 4.1 that NaNO3 is soluble and AgCl is insoluble. Therefore, solid AgCl
forms according to the following net ionic equation:
Ag 1aq2  Cl 1aq2 ¡ AgCl1s2
In this case we must add enough Cl ions to react with all the Ag ions present. Thus we
must calculate the moles of Ag ions present in 1.50 L of a 0.100 M AgNO3 solution (remember that a 0.100 M AgNO3 solution contains 0.100 M Ag ions and 0.100 M NO3
ions):
1.50 L 

0.100 mol Ag
 0.150 mol Ag
L

Because Ag and Cl react in a 1:1 ratio, 0.150 mol Cl ions and thus 0.150 mol NaCl
are required. We calculate the mass of NaCl required as follows:
0.150 mol NaCl 

58.45 g NaCl
 8.77 g NaCl
mol NaCl
See Exercise 4.47.

Notice from Sample Exercise 4.10 that the procedures for doing stoichiometric calculations for solution reactions are very similar to those for other types of reactions. It is useful
to think in terms of the following steps for reactions in solution.

148

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

Solving Stoichiometry Problems for Reactions in Solution

➥1
➥2
➥3
➥4
➥5
➥6
Sample Exercise 4.11

Identify the species present in the combined solution, and determine what reaction occurs.
Write the balanced net ionic equation for the reaction.
Calculate the moles of reactants.
Determine which reactant is limiting.
Calculate the moles of product or products, as required.
Convert to grams or other units, as required.

Determining the Mass of Product Formed
When aqueous solutions of Na2SO4 and Pb(NO3)2 are mixed, PbSO4 precipitates. Calculate
the mass of PbSO4 formed when 1.25 L of 0.0500 M Pb(NO3)2 and 2.00 L of 0.0250 M
Na2SO4 are mixed.

Na+ SO42–
Pb2+ NO3–

Solution

Write the reaction

Pb2+(aq) + SO42–(aq)
Determine moles
of reactants

SO42– is limiting
Determine moles
of products

PbSO4(s)

➥ 1 Identify the species present in the combined solution, and determine what reaction
occurs. When the aqueous solutions of Na 2SO4 (containing Na and SO42 ions) and
Pb(NO3)2 (containing Pb2 and NO3 ions) are mixed, the resulting solution contains the
ions Na, SO42, Pb2, and NO3. Since NaNO3 is soluble and PbSO4 is insoluble (see
Rule 4 in Table 4.1), solid PbSO4 will form.
➥2

Pb2 1aq2  SO42 1aq2 ¡ PbSO4 1s2

➥ 3 Calculate the moles of reactants. Since 0.0500 M Pb(NO3)2 contains 0.0500 M
Pb2 ions, we can calculate the moles of Pb2 ions in 1.25 L of this solution as follows:
1.25 L 

Grams needed
Convert
to grams

Write the balanced net ionic equation for the reaction. The net ionic equation is

0.0500 mol Pb2
 0.0625 mol Pb2
L

The 0.0250 M Na2SO4 solution contains 0.0250 M SO42 ions, and the number of moles
of SO42 ions in 2.00 L of this solution is

15.2 g PbSO4

2.00 L 

0.0250 mol SO4 2
 0.0500 mol SO42
L

➥4

Determine which reactant is limiting. Because Pb2 and SO42 react in a 1:1 ratio,
the amount of SO42 will be limiting (0.0500 mol SO42 is less than 0.0625 mol Pb2).

➥5

Calculate the moles of product. Since the Pb2 ions are present in excess, only
0.0500 mol of solid PbSO4 will be formed.

➥6

Convert to grams of product. The mass of PbSO4 formed can be calculated using
the molar mass of PbSO4 (303.3 g/mol):
0.0500 mol PbSO4 

303.3 g PbSO4
 15.2 g PbSO4
1 mol PbSO4
See Exercises 4.49 and 4.50.

4.8 Acid–Base Reactions

4.8
Visualization: Proton Transfer

The Brønsted–Lowry concept of acids
and bases will be discussed in detail in
Chapter 14.

149

Acid–Base Reactions

Earlier in this chapter we considered Arrhenius’s concept of acids and bases: An acid is
a substance that produces H ions when dissolved in water, and a base is a substance that
produces OH ions. Although these ideas are fundamentally correct, it is convenient to
have a more general deﬁnition of a base, which includes substances that do not contain
OH ions. Such a deﬁnition was provided by Johannes N. Brønsted (1879–1947) and
Thomas M. Lowry (1874–1936), who deﬁned acids and bases as follows:
An acid is a proton donor.
A base is a proton acceptor.
How do we know when to expect an acid–base reaction? One of the most difﬁcult
tasks for someone inexperienced in chemistry is to predict what reaction might occur when
two solutions are mixed. With precipitation reactions, we found that the best way to deal
with this problem is to focus on the species actually present in the mixed solution. This
idea also applies to acid–base reactions. For example, when an aqueous solution of
hydrogen chloride (HCl) is mixed with an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide (NaOH),
the combined solution contains the ions H, Cl, Na, and OH. The separated ions are
present because HCl is a strong acid and NaOH is a strong base. How can we predict
what reaction occurs, if any? First, will NaCl precipitate? From Table 4.1 we can see that
NaCl is soluble in water and thus will not precipitate. Therefore, the Na and Cl ions
are spectator ions. On the other hand, because water is a nonelectrolyte, large quantities
of H and OH ions cannot coexist in solution. They react to form H2O molecules:
H 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2

Species present
Write the
reaction

Balanced net
ionic equation
Determine moles
of reactants

Identify limiting
reactant
Determine moles
of products

Check units
of products

This is the net ionic equation for the reaction that occurs when aqueous solutions of HCl
and NaOH are mixed.
Next, consider mixing an aqueous solution of acetic acid (HC2H3O2) with an aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide (KOH). In our earlier discussion of conductivity we
said that an aqueous solution of acetic acid is a weak electrolyte. This tells us that acetic
acid does not dissociate into ions to any great extent. In fact, in 0.1 M HC2H3O2 approximately 99% of the HC2H3O2 molecules remain undissociated. However, when solid KOH
is dissolved in water, it dissociates completely to produce K and OH ions. Therefore,
in the solution formed by mixing aqueous solutions of HC2H3O2 and KOH, before any
reaction occurs, the principal species are HC2H3O2, K, and OH. What reaction will
occur? A possible precipitation reaction could occur between K and OH. However, we
know that KOH is soluble, so precipitation does not occur. Another possibility is a reaction
involving the hydroxide ion (a proton acceptor) and some proton donor. Is there a source
of protons in the solution? The answer is yes—the HC2H3O2 molecules. The OH ion has
such a strong afﬁnity for protons that it can strip them from the HC2H3O2 molecules. The
net ionic equation for this reaction is
OH 1aq2  HC2H3O2 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2  C2H3O2 1aq2
This reaction illustrates a very important general principle: The hydroxide ion is such
a strong base that for purposes of stoichiometric calculations it can be assumed to react
completely with any weak acid that we will encounter. Of course, OH ions also react
completely with the H ions in solutions of strong acids.
We will now deal with the stoichiometry of acid–base reactions in aqueous solutions.
The procedure is fundamentally the same as that used previously for precipitation reactions.

Performing Calculations for Acid–Base Reactions

➥1

List the species present in the combined solution before any reaction occurs, and
decide what reaction will occur.

150

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

➥2
➥3
➥4
➥5
➥6

Write the balanced net ionic equation for this reaction.
Calculate the moles of reactants. For reactions in solution, use the volumes of
the original solutions and their molarities.
Determine the limiting reactant where appropriate.
Calculate the moles of the required reactant or product.
Convert to grams or volume (of solution), as required.

An acid–base reaction is often called a neutralization reaction. When just enough base
is added to react exactly with the acid in a solution, we say the acid has been neutralized.
Sample Exercise 4.12

Neutralization Reactions I
What volume of a 0.100 M HCl solution is needed to neutralize 25.0 mL of 0.350 M NaOH?
Solution

H+ Cl –
Na+ OH –

+

–

H (aq) + OH (aq)
Moles OH–

H2O(l )
8.75 × 10–3

No limiting
reactant
+

Moles H

8.75 × 10

–3

Volume needed

Convert to volume

87.5 mL of 0.100 M HCl needed

H Cl

Na

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

Write the reaction

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

➥ 1 List the species present in the combined solution before any reaction occurs, and
decide what reaction will occur. The species present in the mixed solutions before any
reaction occurs are
From HCl(aq)

OH

From NaOH(aq)

What reaction will occur? The two possibilities are
Na 1aq2  Cl 1aq2 ¡ NaCl1s2
H 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2
Since we know that NaCl is soluble, the ﬁrst reaction does not take place (Na and Cl
are spectator ions). However, as we have seen before, the reaction of the H and OH
ions to form H2O does occur.

➥2

Write the balanced net ionic equation. The balanced net ionic equation for this
reaction is

H 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2
➥ 3 Calculate the moles of reactants. The number of moles of OH ions in the 25.0-mL
sample of 0.350 M NaOH is

1L
0.350 mol OH

 8.75  103 mol OH
1000 mL
L NaOH
➥ 4 Determine the limiting reactant. This problem requires the addition of just enough
H ions to react exactly with the OH ions present. Thus we need not be concerned with
determining a limiting reactant.
25.0 mL NaOH 

➥5

Calculate the moles of reactant needed. Since H and OH ions react in a 1:1
ratio, 8.75  103 mol H ions is required to neutralize the OH ions present.

➥6

Convert to volume required. The volume V of 0.100 M HCl required to furnish
8.75  103 mol H ions can be calculated as follows:
V

0.100 mol H
 8.75  103 mol H
L

Solving for V gives
V

8.75  103 mol H
 8.75  102 L
0.100 mol H
L

4.8 Acid–Base Reactions

151

Thus 8.75  102 L (87.5 mL) of 0.100 M HCl is required to neutralize 25.0 mL of
0.350 M NaOH.
See Exercises 4.59 and 4.60.
Sample Exercise 4.13

Neutralization Reactions II
In a certain experiment, 28.0 mL of 0.250 M HNO3 and 53.0 mL of 0.320 M KOH are
mixed. Calculate the amount of water formed in the resulting reaction. What is the
concentration of H or OH ions in excess after the reaction goes to completion?
Solution
The species available for reaction are
H

OH –

NO3

From HNO3
solution

Write the reaction

K

OH

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

NO3–

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

H+
K+

From KOH
solution

Since KNO3 is soluble, K and NO3 are spectator ions, so the net ionic equation is
H+(aq) + OH–(aq)

H 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2

H2O(l )

Find moles H+, OH–

Limiting
reactant is H+
Find moles OH– that react

Concentration
of OH– needed
Find excess OH– concentration

0.123 M OH–

We next compute the amounts of H and OH ions present:
1L
0.250 mol H

 7.00  103 mol H
1000 mL
L HNO3
1L
0.320 mol OH
53.0 mL KOH 

 1.70  102 mol OH
1000 mL
L KOH
28.0 mL HNO3 

Since H and OH react in a 1:1 ratio, the limiting reactant is H. This means that
7.00  103 mol H ions will react with 7.00  103 mol OH ions to form 7.00  103 mol
H2O.
The amount of OH ions in excess is obtained from the following difference:
Original amount  amount consumed  amount in excess
1.70  10 mol OH  7.00  103 mol OH  1.00  102 mol OH
2

The volume of the combined solution is the sum of the individual volumes:
Original volume of HNO3  original volume of KOH  total volume
28.0 mL  53.0 mL  81.0 mL  8.10  102 L
Thus the molarity of OH ions in excess is
mol OH
1.00  102 mol OH
 0.123 M OH

L solution
8.10  102 L
See Exercises 4.61 and 4.62.

Acid–Base Titrations

Visualization: Neutralization of
a Strong Acid by a Strong
Base
Ideally, the endpoint and stoichiometric
point should coincide.

Volumetric analysis is a technique for determining the amount of a certain substance by
doing a titration. A titration involves delivery (from a buret) of a measured volume of a
solution of known concentration (the titrant) into a solution containing the substance being analyzed (the analyte). The titrant contains a substance that reacts in a known manner
with the analyte. The point in the titration where enough titrant has been added to react exactly with the analyte is called the equivalence point or the stoichiometric point. This
point is often marked by an indicator, a substance added at the beginning of the titration
that changes color at (or very near) the equivalence point. The point where the indicator

152

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

Visualization: Titrations

actually changes color is called the endpoint of the titration. The goal is to choose an indicator such that the endpoint (where the indicator changes color) occurs exactly at the
equivalence point (where just enough titrant has been added to react with all the analyte).
The following three requirements must be met for a titration to be successful:
1. The exact reaction between titrant and analyte must be known (and rapid).
2. The stoichiometric (equivalence) point must be marked accurately.
3. The volume of titrant required to reach the stoichiometric point must be known accurately.
When the analyte is a base or an acid, the required titrant is a strong acid or strong
base, respectively. This procedure is called an acid–base titration. An indicator very commonly used for acid–base titrations is phenolphthalein, which is colorless in an acidic solution and pink in a basic solution. Thus, when an acid is titrated with a base, the
phenolphthalein remains colorless until after the acid is consumed and the ﬁrst drop of
excess base is added. In this case, the endpoint (the solution changes from colorless to
pink) occurs approximately one drop of base beyond the stoichiometric point. This type
of titration is illustrated in the three photos in Fig. 4.18.
We will deal with the acid–base titrations only brieﬂy here but will return to the topic
of titrations and indicators in more detail in Chapter 15. The titration of an acid with a
standard solution containing hydroxide ions is described in Sample Exercise 4.15. In
Sample Exercise 4.14 we show how to determine accurately the concentration of a sodium
hydroxide solution. This procedure is called standardizing the solution.

FIGURE 4.18
The titration of an acid with a base. (a) The titrant (the base) is in the buret, and the ﬂask contains the acid solution along with a small amount of
indicator. (b) As base is added drop by drop to the acid solution in the ﬂask during the titration, the indicator changes color, but the color disappears on
mixing. (c) The stoichiometric (equivalence) point is marked by a permanent indicator color change. The volume of base added is the difference between
the ﬁnal and initial buret readings.

4.8 Acid–Base Reactions
Sample Exercise 4.14

153

Neutralization Titration
A student carries out an experiment to standardize (determine the exact concentration of)
a sodium hydroxide solution. To do this, the student weighs out a 1.3009-g sample of
potassium hydrogen phthalate (KHC8H4O4, often abbreviated KHP). KHP (molar mass
204.22 g/mol) has one acidic hydrogen. The student dissolves the KHP in distilled water,
adds phenolphthalein as an indicator, and titrates the resulting solution with the sodium
hydroxide solution to the phenolphthalein endpoint. The difference between the ﬁnal and
initial buret readings indicates that 41.20 mL of the sodium hydroxide solution is required
to react exactly with the 1.3009 g KHP. Calculate the concentration of the sodium
hydroxide solution.
Solution

K+

HC8H4O4–

Aqueous sodium hydroxide contains the Na and OH ions, and KHC8H4O4 dissolves in
water to give the K and HC8H4O4 ions. As the titration proceeds, the mixed solution
contains the following ions: K, HC8H4O4, Na, and OH. The OH will remove an H
from the HC8H4O4 to give the following net ionic reaction:
HC8H4O4 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2  C8H4O42 1aq2

Since the reaction exhibits 1:1
droxide solution must contain
moles of HC8H4O4 in 1.3009
We calculate the moles of
1.3009 g KHC8H4O4 

stoichiometry, we know that 41.20 mL of the sodium hyexactly the same number of moles of OH as there are
g KHC8H4O4.
KHC8H4O4 in the usual way:

1 mol KHC8H4O4
 6.3701  103 mol KHC8H4O4
204.22 g KHC8H4O4

This means that 6.3701  103 mol OH must be added to react with the 6.3701  103
mol HC8H4O4. Thus 41.20 mL (4.120  102 L) of the sodium hydroxide solution must
contain 6.3701  103 mol OH (and Na), and the concentration of the sodium hydroxide solution is
6.3701  103 mol NaOH
mol NaOH

L solution
4.120  102 L
 0.1546 M

Molarity of NaOH 

This standard sodium hydroxide solution can now be used in other experiments (see
Sample Exercise 4.15).
See Exercises 4.63 and 4.66.
Sample Exercise 4.15

Neutralization Analysis
An environmental chemist analyzed the efﬂuent (the released waste material) from an industrial process known to produce the compounds carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and benzoic acid (HC7H5O2), a weak acid that has one acidic hydrogen atom per molecule. A
sample of this efﬂuent weighing 0.3518 g was shaken with water, and the resulting aqueous solution required 10.59 mL of 0.1546 M NaOH for neutralization. Calculate the mass
percent of HC7H5O2 in the original sample.
Solution
In this case, the sample was a mixture containing CCl4 and HC7H5O2, and it was titrated
with OH ions. Clearly, CCl4 is not an acid (it contains no hydrogen atoms), so we can
assume it does not react with OH ions. However, HC7H5O2 is an acid that donates one
H ion per molecule to react with an OH ion as follows:
HC7H5O2 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2  C7H5O2 1aq2

154

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
Although HC7H5O2 is a weak acid, the OH ion is such a strong base that we can assume
that each OH ion added will react with a HC7H5O2 molecule until all the benzoic acid
is consumed.
We must ﬁrst determine the number of moles of OH ions required to react with all
the HC7H5O2:
10.59 mL NaOH 

1L
0.1546 mol OH

 1.637  103 mol OH
1000 mL
L NaOH

This number is also the number of moles of HC7H5O2 present. The number of grams of
the acid is calculated using its molar mass (122.12 g/mol):
1.637  103 mol HC7H5O2 

122.12 g HC7H5O2
 0.1999 g HC7H5O2
1 mol HC7H5O2

The mass percent of HC7H5O2 in the original sample is
0.1999 g
 100  56.82%
0.3518 g
See Exercise 4.65.
The ﬁrst step in the analysis of a
complex solution is to write down the
components and focus on the chemistry
of each one. When a strong electrolyte is
present, write it as separated ions.

In doing problems involving titrations, you must ﬁrst decide what reaction is occurring. Sometimes this seems difﬁcult because the titration solution contains several
components. The key to success is to ﬁrst write down all the components in the solution
and focus on the chemistry of each one. We have been emphasizing this approach in dealing with the reactions between ions in solution. Make it a habit to write down the
components of solutions before trying to decide what reaction(s) might take place as you
attempt the end-of-chapter problems involving titrations.

4.9

Oxidation–Reduction Reactions

We have seen that many important substances are ionic. Sodium chloride, for example,
can be formed by the reaction of elemental sodium and chlorine:
Visualization: Zinc and Iodine

Visualization: Barking Dogs:
Reaction of Phosphorus

Visualization: Dry Ice and
Magnesium

Visualization: Sugar and
Potassium Chlorate

2Na1s2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2NaCl1s2
In this reaction, solid sodium, which contains neutral sodium atoms, reacts with chlorine
gas, which contains diatomic Cl2 molecules, to form the ionic solid NaCl, which contains
Na and Cl ions. This process is represented in Fig. 4.19. Reactions like this one, in
which one or more electrons are transferred, are called oxidation–reduction reactions or
redox reactions.
Many important chemical reactions involve oxidation and reduction. Photosynthesis,
which stores energy from the sun in plants by converting carbon dioxide and water to
sugar, is a very important oxidation–reduction reaction. In fact, most reactions used for
energy production are redox reactions. In humans, the oxidation of sugars, fats, and
proteins provides the energy necessary for life. Combustion reactions, which provide most
of the energy to power our civilization, also involve oxidation and reduction. An example
is the reaction of methane with oxygen:
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2  energy
Even though none of the reactants or products in this reaction is ionic, the reaction is still
assumed to involve a transfer of electrons from carbon to oxygen. To explain this, we must
introduce the concept of oxidation states.

4.9 Oxidation–Reduction Reactions

Cl–

Na+

Cl–

155

Na+

Na
Na

Cl Cl

2Na(s)
Sodium

+

Cl2(g)
Chlorine

2NaCl(s)
Sodium chloride

FIGURE 4.19
The reaction of solid sodium and gaseous chlorine to form solid sodium chloride.

Oxidation States
The concept of oxidation states (also called oxidation numbers) provides a way to keep
track of electrons in oxidation–reduction reactions, particularly redox reactions involving
covalent substances. Recall that electrons are shared by atoms in covalent bonds. The oxidation states of atoms in covalent compounds are obtained by arbitrarily assigning the
electrons (which are actually shared) to particular atoms. We do this as follows: For a
covalent bond between two identical atoms, the electrons are split equally between the
two. In cases where two different atoms are involved (and the electrons are thus shared
unequally), the shared electrons are assigned completely to the atom that has the stronger
attraction for electrons. For example, recall from the discussion of the water molecule in
Section 4.1 that oxygen has a greater attraction for electrons than does hydrogen. Therefore, in assigning the oxidation state of oxygen and hydrogen in H2O, we assume that the
oxygen atom actually possesses all the electrons. Recall that a hydrogen atom has one
electron. Thus, in water, oxygen has formally “taken” the electrons from two hydrogen
atoms. This gives the oxygen an excess of two electrons (its oxidation state is 2) and
leaves each hydrogen with no electrons (the oxidation state of each hydrogen is thus 1).
We deﬁne the oxidation states (or oxidation numbers) of the atoms in a covalent
compound as the imaginary charges the atoms would have if the shared electrons were
divided equally between identical atoms bonded to each other or, for different atoms, were
all assigned to the atom in each bond that has the greater attraction for electrons. Of course,

156

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Iron Zeroes in on Pollution
reating groundwater contaminated with pollutants is typically very complicated and very expensive. However,
chemists have discovered a low-tech, economical method for
treating the contaminated groundwater near a former semiconductor manufacturing plant in Sunnyvale, California.
They have replaced the elaborate decontamination machinery used at the site for more than a decade with 220 tons of
iron ﬁlings buried in a giant trough. Because there are no
pumps to maintain and no electricity to purchase, this simple
system will save approximately $300,000 per year. The property, which was thought to be unusable for the 30-year lifetime
of the old clean-up process because of the need for constant
monitoring and access, can now be used immediately.
A schematic of the iron treatment method is shown in
the accompanying ﬁgure. At Sunnyvale, the iron barrier is
40 feet long, 4 feet wide, and 20 feet deep. In the 4 days it
takes for contaminated water to seep through the wall of iron,

T

the chlorinated organic contaminants are degraded into products that are then themselves decomposed to simpler substances. According to engineers on the site, the polluted
water that seeps through the wall meets Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) standards when it emerges on the
other side.
How does iron metal clean up contaminated groundwater? It’s a result of the ability of iron metal (oxidation
state  0) to act as a reducing agent toward the chlorinecontaining organic pollutant molecules. The reaction can be
represented as follows:

Fe1s2  RCl1aq2  H 1aq2 ¡
Fe2 1aq2  RH1aq2  Cl 1aq2

where RCl represents a chlorinated organic molecule. The
reaction appears to involve a direct reaction between the
metal and an RCl molecule adsorbed on the metal surface.

for ionic compounds containing monatomic ions, the oxidation states of the ions are equal
to the ion charges.
These considerations lead to a series of rules for assigning oxidation states that are
summarized in Table 4.2. Application of these simple rules allows the assignment of
oxidation states in most compounds. To apply these rules recognize that the sum of the
oxidation states must be zero for an electrically neutral compound. For an ion, the sum
of the oxidation states must equal the charge of the ion. The principles are illustrated by
Sample Exercise 4.16.

TABLE 4.2

Oxidation of copper metal by nitric acid.
The copper atoms lose two electrons to
form Cu2 ions, which give a deep green
color that becomes turquoise when diluted
with water.

Rules for Assigning Oxidation States

The Oxidation State of . . .

Summary

Examples

• An atom in an element
is zero

Element: 0

Na1s2, O2 1g2, O3 1g2, Hg1l2

• A monatomic ion is the
same as its charge

Monatomic ion:
charge of ion

Na, Cl

• Fluorine is 1 in its
compounds

Fluorine: 1

HF, PF3

• Oxygen is usually 2 in
its compounds
Exception:
peroxides (containing O22)
in which oxygen is 1

Oxygen: 2

H2O, CO2

• Hydrogen is 1 in its
covalent compounds

Hydrogen: 1

H2O, HCl, NH3

4.9 Oxidation–Reduction Reactions

157

In addition to decomposing chlorinated organic contaminants, iron appears
to be useful against other pollutants as
well. Iron can degrade dye wastes from
textile mills and can reduce soluble
Cr(VI) compounds to insoluble Cr(III)
products, which are much less harmful.
Iron’s reducing abilities also appear useful in removing radioactive technetium, a
common pollutant at nuclear processing
facilities. Iron also appears to be effective
for removing nitrates from the soil.
Other metals, such as zinc, tin, and
palladium, have shown promise for use in
groundwater clean-up, too. These metals generally react
more quickly than iron but are more expensive and pose their
own environmental hazards.
Inexpensive and environmentally benign, iron seems to
be the metal of choice for most groundwater clean-up. It’s
cheap, it’s effective, it’s almost a miracle!

It is worthwhile to note at this point that the convention is to write actual charges on
ions as n or n, the number being written before the plus or minus sign. On the other
hand, oxidation states (not actual charges) are written n or n, the number being written
after the plus or minus sign.

Sample Exercise 4.16

Assigning Oxidation States
Assign oxidation states to all atoms in the following.
a. CO2
b. SF6
c. NO3
Solution
a. Since we have a speciﬁc rule for the oxidation state of oxygen, we will assign its value
ﬁrst. The oxidation state of oxygen is 2. The oxidation state of the carbon atom can
be determined by recognizing that since CO2 has no charge, the sum of the oxidation
states for oxygen and carbon must be zero. Since each oxygen is 2 and there are two
oxygen atoms, the carbon atom must be assigned an oxidation state of 4:
CO2

p
4

r
2 for each oxygen

We can check the assigned oxidation states by noting that when the number of atoms
is taken into account, the sum is zero as required:
1142  2122  0

p
No. of C
atoms

h
No. of O
atoms

158

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
b. Since we have no rule for sulfur, we ﬁrst assign the oxidation state of each ﬂuorine
as 1. The sulfur must then be assigned an oxidation state of 6 to balance the total
of 6 from the ﬂuorine atoms:
SF6

p
6

r
1 for each ﬂuorine

Reality Check: 6  6112  0
c. Oxygen has an oxidation state of 2. Because the sum of the oxidation states of the
three oxygens is 6 and the net charge on the NO3 ion is 1, the nitrogen must have
an oxidation state of 5:
NO3

p
5

r
2 for each oxygen

Reality Check: 5  3122  1
Note that in this case the sum must be 1 (the overall charge on the ion).
See Exercises 4.67 through 4.70.

The Characteristics of Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Oxidation–reduction reactions are characterized by a transfer of electrons. In some cases,
the transfer occurs in a literal sense to form ions, such as in the reaction
2Na1s2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2NaCl1s2

88n

1
(each H)

h
0

h
4

8n

Oxidation h
state
4

8n

However, sometimes the transfer is less obvious. For example, consider the combustion
of methane (the oxidation state for each atom is given):
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2
88n

Magnetite is a magnetic ore containing
Fe3O4. Note that the compass needle points
toward the ore.

We need to make one more point about oxidation states, and this can be illustrated by the
compound Fe3O4, which is the main component in magnetite, an iron ore that accounts
for the reddish color of many types of rocks and soils. To determine the oxidation states
in Fe3O4, we ﬁrst assign each oxygen atom its usual oxidation state of 2. The three iron
atoms must yield a total of 8 to balance the total of 8 from the four oxygens. This means
that each iron atom has an oxidation state of 83. A noninteger value for the oxidation
state may seem strange because charge is expressed in whole numbers. However, although
they are rare, noninteger oxidation states do occur because of the rather arbitrary way that
electrons are divided up by the rules in Table 4.2. For Fe3O4, for example, the rules assume that all the iron atoms are equal, when in fact this compound can best be viewed as
containing four O2 ions, two Fe3 ions, and one Fe2 ion per formula unit. (Note that
the “average” charge on iron works out to be 83 , which is equal to the oxidation state we
determined above.) Noninteger oxidation states should not intimidate you. They are used
in the same way as integer oxidation states—for keeping track of electrons.

2
1
2
(each O)(each H)

Note that the oxidation state for oxygen in O2 is 0 because it is in elemental form. In this
reaction there are no ionic compounds, but we can still describe the process in terms of
a transfer of electrons. Note that carbon undergoes a change in oxidation state from 4
in CH4 to 4 in CO2. Such a change can be accounted for by a loss of eight electrons
(the symbol e stands for an electron);
CH4 ¡ CO2  8e
h
4

h
4

4.9 Oxidation–Reduction Reactions

159

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Pearly Whites
aluminum oxide, calcium carbonate, or calcium phosphate
to help scrub off adsorbed stains.
Stains due to molecules lying below the surface are usually attacked with an oxidizing agent, hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2). As H2O2 breaks down into water and oxygen, intermediates are produced that react with and decompose the
molecules that produce teeth discoloration.
Off-the-shelf teeth whiteners typically contain carbamide
peroxide (a 1:1 mixture of urea and hydrogen peroxide), glycerin, stannate and pyrophosphate salts (preservatives), and
ﬂavoring agents. These whiteners come in a form that can be
brushed directly onto the teeth or are embedded in a plastic
strip that can be stuck to the teeth. Because these products
have a low strength for safety reasons, it may take several
weeks of applying them for full whitening to occur.
Whitening treatments by dentists often involve the application of substances containing more than 30% hydrogen
peroxide. These substances must be used with the appropriate protection of the tissues surrounding the teeth. Keeping
your teeth white is another example of chemistry in action.

eople have long been concerned about the “whiteness”
of their teeth. In the Middle Ages the local barbersurgeon would whiten teeth using nitric acid—a procedure
fraught with dangers, including the fact that nitric acid dissolves tooth enamel, which in turn leads to massive tooth
decay. Today many safer procedures are available for keeping teeth sparkling white.
The outer layer of teeth, the enamel, consists of the mineral hydroxyapatite, which contains calcium phosphate.
Underneath the enamel is dentin, an off-white mixture of
calcium phosphate and collagen that protects the nerves and
blood vessels at the center of the tooth.
The discoloration of teeth is usually due to colored molecules in our diet from sources such as blueberries, red wine,
and coffee. The tar from cigarettes also stains teeth. Aging
is another factor. As we get older, chemical changes occur
that cause the dentin to become more yellow.
The stains produced when colored molecules are adsorbed to the surfaces of teeth can be removed by brushing.
Toothpastes contain abrasives such as tiny particles of silica,

P

X

On the other hand, each oxygen changes from an oxidation state of 0 in O2 to 2 in H2O
and CO2, signifying a gain of two electrons per atom. Since four oxygen atoms are involved, this is a gain of eight electrons:

el
n
tro r
fe
ns

h

4(2)  8

0

Reduced

loses electrons

gains electrons

oxidation state
increases

oxidation state
decreases

reducing agent

oxidizing agent

FIGURE 4.20
A summary of an oxidation–reduction
process, in which M is oxidized and X is
reduced.

2Na1s2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2NaCl1s2
h
0

h
0

h
1

1

sodium is oxidized and chlorine is reduced. In addition, Cl2 is called the oxidizing agent
(electron acceptor), and Na is called the reducing agent (electron donor). These terms
are summarized in Fig. 4.20.
Concerning the reaction
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2

h
4

1

h
0

h
4 2

h
1 2

8n

Oxidized

No change occurs in the oxidation state of hydrogen, and it is not formally involved in
the electron-transfer process.
With this background, we can now deﬁne some important terms. Oxidation is an increase in oxidation state (a loss of electrons). Reduction is a decrease in oxidation state
(a gain of electrons). Thus in the reaction
8n

X–

8n

M+

88n

8n

tra

ec

2O2  8e ¡ CO2  2H2O

8n

M

160

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Aging: Does It Involve Oxidation?
lthough aging is supposed to bring wisdom, almost no
one wants to get old. Along with wisdom, aging brings
wrinkles, loss of physical strength, and greater susceptibility to disease.
Why do we age? No one knows for certain, but many
scientists think that oxidation plays a major role. The oxygen molecule and other oxidizing agents in the body apparently can extract single electrons from the large molecules
that make up cell membranes, thus making them very reactive. Subsequently, these activated molecules can link up,
changing the properties of the cell membrane. At some point,
enough of these reactions have occurred that the body’s immune system comes to view the changed cell as an “enemy”
and destroys it. This is particularly detrimental to the organism when the cells involved are irreplaceable. Nerve

A

Oxidation is an increase in oxidation
state. Reduction is a decrease in
oxidation state.
A helpful mnemonic device is OIL RIG
(Oxidation Involves Loss; Reduction
Involves Gain). Another common mnemonic
is LEO says GER. (Loss of Electrons,
Oxidation; Gain of Electrons, Reduction).
An oxidizing agent is reduced and a
reducing agent is oxidized in a redox
reaction.

Sample Exercise 4.17

cells, for example, fall into this category. They rarely regenerate in an adult.
The body has defenses against oxidation, such as vitamin E, a well-known antioxidant. Studies have shown that
red blood cells age much faster than normal when they are
deﬁcient in vitamin E. Based on studies such as these, some
have suggested large doses of vitamin E as a preventive measure against aging, but there is no solid evidence that this
practice has any impact on aging.
Another protective antioxidant found in our bodies is superoxide dismutase (SOD), which protects us from the
superoxide ion O2, a powerful oxidizing agent that is particularly damaging to vital enzymes. The importance of SOD
in opposing the aging process is indicated from the results of
a study by Dr. Richard Cutler at the Gerontology Research

we can say the following:
Carbon is oxidized because there has been an increase in its oxidation state (carbon
has formally lost electrons).
Oxygen is reduced because there has been a decrease in its oxidation state (oxygen
has formally gained electrons).
CH4 is the reducing agent.
O2 is the oxidizing agent.
Note that when the oxidizing or reducing agent is named, the whole compound is speciﬁed,
not just the element that undergoes the change in oxidation state.

Oxidation–Reduction Reactions I
When powdered aluminum metal is mixed with pulverized iodine crystals and a drop of
water is added to help the reaction get started, the resulting reaction produces a great deal
of energy. The mixture bursts into ﬂames, and a purple smoke of I2 vapor is produced
from the excess iodine. The equation for the reaction is
2Al1s2  3I2 1s2 ¡ 2AlI3 1s2
For this reaction, identify the atoms that are oxidized and reduced, and specify the oxidizing and reducing agents.
Solution
The ﬁrst step is to assign oxidation states:
2Al1s2  3I2 1s2 ¡
h
h
0
0
Free elements

2AlI3 1s2

h
3
1 (each I)
AlI3(s) is a salt that
contains Al3 and I ions

8n

Finely ground aluminum and iodine are
mixed and react vigorously to form aluminum iodide after a drop of water is
added. The purple cloud is excess iodine
vaporized by the heat of the reaction.

4.9 Oxidation–Reduction Reactions

Center of the National Institutes of Health in Baltimore that
showed a strong correlation between the life spans of a dozen
mammalian species and their levels of SOD. Human SOD is
now being produced by the techniques of biotechnology in
amounts that will enable scientists to carefully study its effects
on aging and on various diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis
and muscular dystrophy. Although SOD is available in health
food stores in forms to be taken orally, this practice is useless
because the SOD is digested (broken down into simpler
substances) before it can reach the bloodstream.
Research does indicate that consuming certain foods
may retard the aging process. For example, a recent study of
8000 male Harvard graduates found that chocolate and candy
eaters live almost a year longer than those who abstain. Although the researchers from Harvard School of Public Health
are not certain of the mechanism for this effect, they suggest
that the antioxidants present in chocolate may provide the
health beneﬁts. For example, chocolate contains phenols,

161

antioxidants that are also present in wine, another substance
that seems to promote good health if used in moderation.
Oxidation is only one possible cause for aging. Research
continues on many fronts to try to discover why we get
“older” as time passes.

Can eating chocolate slow down the aging process?

Since each aluminum atom changes its oxidation state from 0 to 3 (an increase in oxidation state), aluminum is oxidized. On the other hand, the oxidation state of each iodine
atom decreases from 0 to 1, and iodine is reduced. Since Al furnishes electrons for the
reduction of iodine, it is the reducing agent; I2 is the oxidizing agent.
See Exercises 4.71 and 4.72.

Oxidation–Reduction Reactions II
Metallurgy, the process of producing a metal from its ore, always involves
oxidation–reduction reactions. In the metallurgy of galena (PbS), the principal leadcontaining ore, the ﬁrst step is the conversion of lead sulﬁde to its oxide (a process called
roasting):
2PbS1s2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2PbO1s2  2SO2 1g2
The oxide is then treated with carbon monoxide to produce the free metal:
PbO1s2  CO1g2 ¡ Pb1s2  CO2 1g2
For each reaction, identify the atoms that are oxidized and reduced, and specify the
oxidizing and reducing agents.
Solution
For the ﬁrst reaction, we can assign the following oxidation states:
h
0

h
2

2

8n

h
2 2

8n

2PbS1s2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2PbO1s2  2SO2 1g2

8n

Sample Exercise 4.18

h
4 2 (each O)

The oxidation state for the sulfur atom increases from 2 to 4. Thus sulfur is oxidized.
The oxidation state for each oxygen atom decreases from 0 to 2. Oxygen is reduced. The

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
oxidizing agent (that accepts the electrons) is O2, and the reducing agent (that donates
electrons) is PbS.
For the second reaction we have

2

h
2

2

h
0

h
4 2 (each O)

8n

h
2

8n

PbO1s2  CO1g2 ¡ Pb1s2  CO2 1g2
8n

162

Lead is reduced (its oxidation state decreases from 2 to 0), and carbon is oxidized (its
oxidation state increases from 2 to 4). PbO is the oxidizing agent, and CO is the reducing agent.
See Exercises 4.71 and 4.72.

4.10

Balancing Oxidation–Reduction Equations

Oxidation–reduction reactions in aqueous solutions are often complicated, which means
that it can be difﬁcult to balance their equations by simple inspection. In this section we
will discuss a special technique for balancing the equations of redox reactions that occur
in aqueous solutions. It is called the half-reaction method.

The Half-Reaction Method for Balancing Oxidation–Reduction
Reactions in Aqueous Solutions
For oxidation–reduction reactions that occur in aqueous solution, it is useful to separate
the reaction into two half-reactions: one involving oxidation and the other involving
reduction. For example, consider the unbalanced equation for the oxidation–reduction
reaction between cerium(IV) ion and tin(II) ion:
Ce4 1aq2  Sn2 1aq2 ¡ Ce3 1aq2  Sn4 1aq2
This reaction can be separated into a half-reaction involving the substance being
reduced,
Ce4 1aq2 ¡ Ce3 1aq2
and one involving the substance being oxidized,
Sn2 1aq2 ¡ Sn4 1aq2
The general procedure is to balance the equations for the half-reactions separately and
then to add them to obtain the overall balanced equation. The half-reaction method for
balancing oxidation–reduction equations differs slightly depending on whether the reaction
takes place in acidic or basic solution.

The Half-Reaction Method for Balancing Equations for Oxidation–Reduction
Reactions Occurring in Acidic Solution

➥1
➥2

Write separate equations for the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
For each half-reaction,
a. Balance all the elements except hydrogen and oxygen.
b. Balance oxygen using H2O.

4.10 Balancing Oxidation–Reduction Equations

163

c. Balance hydrogen using H.
d. Balance the charge using electrons.

➥3
➥4
➥5

If necessary, multiply one or both balanced half-reactions by an integer to
equalize the number of electrons transferred in the two half-reactions.
Add the half-reactions, and cancel identical species.
Check that the elements and charges are balanced.

These steps are summarized by the following ﬂowchart:

Write separate half-reactions

Oxidation
half-reaction

Balancing order
a. elements (except H,O)
b. oxygen (use H2O)
c. hydrogen (use H+)
d. charge (use electrons)

Balance

Balanced oxidation
half-reaction

Reduction
half-reaction
Balance

Balanced reduction
half-reaction

Equalize electrons
transferred

Add half-reactions

Equalize electrons
transferred

Cancel identical species

Check that elements and
charges are balanced

We will illustrate this method by balancing the equation for the reaction between
permanganate and iron(II) ions in acidic solution:
MnO4 1aq2  Fe2 1aq2 ¡ Fe3 1aq2  Mn2 1aq2
Acid

This reaction can be used to analyze iron ore for its iron content.

➥ 1

Identify and write equations for the half-reactions. The oxidation states for the
half-reaction involving the permanganate ion show that manganese is reduced:
MnO4 ¡ Mn2
8n

h
2 (each O)

7

h
2

This is the reduction half-reaction. The other half-reaction involves the oxidation of iron(II)
to iron(III) ion and is the oxidation half-reaction:
Fe2 ¡ Fe3
h
2

h
3

164

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

➥2

Balance each half-reaction. For the reduction reaction, we have
MnO4 1aq2 ¡ Mn2 1aq2
a. The manganese is balanced.
b. We balance oxygen by adding 4H2O to the right side of the equation:
MnO4 1aq2 ¡ Mn2 1aq2  4H2O1l2
c. Next, we balance hydrogen by adding 8H to the left side:
8H 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2 ¡ Mn2 1aq2  4H2O1l2
d. All the elements have been balanced, but we need to balance the charge using
electrons. At this point we have the following overall charges for reactants and
products in the reduction half-reaction:
8H 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2 ¡ Mn2 1aq2  4H2O1l2


1



2

0

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

8

7

2

We can equalize the charges by adding ﬁve electrons to the left side:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎪⎪
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎪
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

5e  8H 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2 ¡ Mn2 1aq2  4H2O1l2
2

2

Both the elements and the charges are now balanced, so this represents the
balanced reduction half-reaction. The fact that ﬁve electrons appear on the
reactant side of the equation makes sense, since ﬁve electrons are required
to reduce MnO4 (Mn has an oxidation state of 7) to Mn2 (Mn has an
oxidation state of 2).
For the oxidation reaction
Fe2 1aq2 ¡ Fe3 1aq2
the elements are balanced, and we must simply balance the charge:

2

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

Fe2 1aq2 ¡ Fe3 1aq2
3

One electron is needed on the right side to give a net 2 charge on both sides:

2

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

Fe2 1aq2 ¡ Fe3 1aq2  e
2

➥3
The number of electrons gained in the
reduction half-reaction must equal the
number of electrons lost in the oxidation
half-reaction.

Equalize the electron transfer in the two half-reactions. Since the reduction halfreaction involves a transfer of ﬁve electrons and the oxidation half-reaction involves a
transfer of only one electron, the oxidation half-reaction must be multiplied by 5:
5Fe2 1aq2 ¡ 5Fe3 1aq2  5e

➥4

Add the half-reactions. The half-reactions are added to give

5e  5Fe2 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2  8H 1aq2 ¡
5Fe3 1aq2  Mn2 1aq2  4H2O1l2  5e

Note that the electrons cancel (as they must) to give the ﬁnal balanced equation:
5Fe2 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2  8H 1aq2 ¡ 5Fe3 1aq2  Mn2 1aq2  4H2O1l2

4.10 Balancing Oxidation–Reduction Equations

➥5

165

Check that elements and charges are balanced.

Elements balance: 5Fe, 1Mn, 4O, 8H ¡ 5Fe, 1Mn, 4O, 8H
Charges balance: 5122  112  8112  17 ¡
5132  122  0  17
The equation is balanced.
Sample Exercise 4.19

Balancing Oxidation–Reduction Reactions (Acidic)
Potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) is a bright orange compound that can be reduced to a
blue-violet solution of Cr3 ions. Under certain conditions, K2Cr2O7 reacts with ethyl
alcohol (C2H5OH) as follows:
H 1aq2  Cr2O72 1aq2  C2H5OH1l2 ¡ Cr3 1aq2  CO2 1g2  H2O1l2
Balance this equation using the half-reaction method.
Solution

➥1

The reduction half-reaction is
Cr2O72 1aq2 ¡ Cr3 1aq2

Chromium is reduced from an oxidation state of 6 in Cr2O72 to one of 3 in Cr3.
The oxidation half-reaction is
C2H5OH1l2 ¡ CO2 1g2
Carbon is oxidized from an oxidation state of 2 in C2H5OH to 4 in CO2.

➥2

Balancing all elements except hydrogen and oxygen in the ﬁrst half-reaction, we

have
Cr2O72 1aq2 ¡ 2Cr3 1aq2
Balancing oxygen using H2O, we have
Cr2O72 1aq2 ¡ 2Cr3 1aq2  7H2O1l2
Balancing hydrogen using H, we have
14H 1aq2  Cr2O72 1aq2 ¡ 2Cr3 1aq2  7H2O1l2
Balancing the charge using electrons, we have
6e  14H 1aq2  Cr2O72 1aq2 ¡ 2Cr3 1aq2  7H2O1l2

When potassium dichromate reacts with ethanol, a blue-violet solution containing Cr3 is formed.

166

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
Next, we turn to the oxidation half-reaction
C2H5OH1l2 ¡ CO2 1g2
Balancing carbon, we have
C2H5OH1l2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2
Balancing oxygen using H2O, we have
C2H5OH1l2  3H2O1l2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2
Balancing hydrogen using H, we have
C2H5OH1l2  3H2O1l2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  12H 1aq2
We then balance the charge by adding 12e to the right side:
C2H5OH1l2  3H2O1l2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  12H 1aq2  12e

➥3

In the reduction half-reaction there are 6 electrons on the left-hand side, and there
are 12 electrons on the right-hand side of the oxidation half-reaction. Thus we multiply
the reduction half-reaction by 2 to give
12e  28H 1aq2  2Cr2O72 1aq2 ¡ 4Cr 3 1aq2  14H2O1l2

➥4
Reduction Half-Reaction:
Oxidation Half-Reaction:
Complete Reaction:

Adding the half-reactions and canceling identical species, we have
12e  28H 1aq2  2Cr2O72 1aq2 ¡ 4Cr3 1aq2  14H2O1l2
C2H5OH1l2  3H2O1l2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  12H 1aq2  12e

16H 1aq2  2Cr2O72 1aq2  C2H5OH1l2 ¡ 4Cr3  11H2O1l2  2CO2 1g2

➥5

Check that elements and charges are balanced.
Elements balance:
22H, 4Cr, 15O, 2C ¡ 22H, 4Cr, 15O, 2C
Charges balance: 16  2122  0  12 ¡ 4132  0  0  12
See Exercises 4.73 and 4.74.

Oxidation–reduction reactions can occur in basic solutions (the reactions involve OH
ions) as well as in acidic solution (the reactions involve H ions). The half-reaction method
for balancing equations is slightly different for the two cases.

The Half-Reaction Method for Balancing Equations for Oxidation–Reduction
Reactions Occurring in Basic Solution

➥1

Use the half-reaction method as speciﬁed for acidic solutions to obtain the ﬁnal
balanced equation as if H ions were present.

➥2

To both sides of the equation obtained above, add a number of OH ions
that is equal to the number of H ions. (We want to eliminate H by forming H2O.)

➥3

Form H2O on the side containing both H and OH ions, and eliminate the
number of H2O molecules that appear on both sides of the equation.

➥4

Check that elements and charges are balanced.

4.10 Balancing Oxidation–Reduction Equations

167

This method is summarized by the following ﬂowchart:
Write separate half-reactions

Oxidation
half-reaction

Reduction
half-reaction

Balancing order
a. elements (except H,O)
b. oxygen (use H2O)
c. hydrogen (use H+)
d. charge (use electrons)

Balance

Balanced oxidation
half-reaction

Balance

Balanced reduction
half-reaction

Equalize electrons
transferred

Add half-reactions

Equalize electrons
transferred

Cancel identical species

Check that elements and
charges are balanced
Add OH– to both sides
of equation (equal to H+)

Form H2O on the side
containing H+ and OH– ions
Eliminate number of H2O
appearing on both sides

Check that elements and
charges are balanced

We will illustrate how this method is applied in Sample Exercise 4.20.
Sample Exercise 4.20

Balancing Oxidation–Reduction Reactions (Basic)
Silver is sometimes found in nature as large nuggets; more often it is found mixed with
other metals and their ores. An aqueous solution containing cyanide ion is often used to
extract the silver using the following reaction that occurs in basic solution:
Ag1s2  CN 1aq2  O2 1g2 —¡ Ag1CN2 2 1aq2
Basic

Balance this equation using the half-reaction method.
Solution

➥1

Balance the equation as if H ions were present. Balance the oxidation halfreaction:
CN 1aq2  Ag1s2 ¡ Ag1CN2 2 1aq2
Balance carbon and nitrogen:
2CN 1aq2  Ag1s2 ¡ Ag1CN2 2 1aq2
Balance the charge:
2CN 1aq2  Ag1s2 ¡ Ag1CN2 2 1aq2  e

168

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry
Balance the reduction half-reaction:
Balance oxygen:

O2 1g2 ¡

O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1l2

Balance hydrogen:

O2 1g2  4H 1aq2 ¡ 2H2O1l2

Balance the charge:

4e  O2 1g2  4H 1aq2 ¡ 2H2O1l2

Multiply the balanced oxidation half-reaction by 4:

8CN 1aq2  4Ag1s2 ¡ 4Ag1CN2 2 1aq2  4e

Add the half-reactions, and cancel identical species:

8CN 1aq2  4Ag1s2 ¡ 4Ag1CN2 2 1aq2  4e
4e  O2 1g2  4H 1aq2 ¡ 2H2O1l2

Oxidation Half-Reaction:
Reduction Half-Reaction:

8CN 1aq2  4Ag1s2  O2 1g2  4H 1aq2 ¡ 4Ag1CN2 2 1aq2  2H2O1l2

Complete Reaction:

➥2

Add OH ions to both sides of the balanced equation to eliminate the H ions.
We need to add 4OH to each side:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

8CN 1aq2  4Ag1s2  O2 1g2  4H 1aq2  4OH 1aq2 ¡
4H2O(l)

4Ag1CN2 2 1aq2  2H2O1l2  4OH 1aq2

➥3

Eliminate as many H2O molecules as possible:

➥4

Check that elements and charges are balanced.

8CN 1aq2  4Ag1s2  O2 1g2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 4Ag1CN2 2 1aq2  4OH 1aq2
Elements balance:
8C, 8N, 4Ag, 4O, 4H ¡ 8C, 8N, 4Ag, 4O, 4H
Charges balance: 8112  0  0  0  8 ¡ 4112  4112  8
See Exercises 4.75 and 4.76.

Key Terms
aqueous solution

Section 4.1
polar molecule
hydration
solubility

Section 4.2
solute
solvent
electrical conductivity
strong electrolyte
weak electrolyte
nonelectrolyte
acid
strong acid
strong base
weak acid
weak base

For Review
Chemical reactions in solution are very important in everyday life.
Water is a polar solvent that dissolves many ionic and polar substances.
Electrolytes
䊉 Strong electolyte: 100% dissociated to produce separate ions; strongly conducts an
electric current
䊉 Weak electrolyte: Only a small percentage of dissolved molecules produce ions;
weakly conducts an electric current
䊉 Nonelectrolyte: Dissolved substance produces no ions; does not conduct an electric
current
Acids and bases
䊉 Arrhenius model
• Acid: produces H
• Base: produces OH

For Review
Section 4.3
molarity
standard solution
dilution

䊉

Section 4.5

䊉

precipitation reaction
precipitate

䊉

Section 4.6
formula equation
complete ionic equation
spectator ions
net ionic equation

Section 4.8
acid
base
neutralization reaction
volumetric analysis
titration
stoichiometric (equivalence) point
indicator
endpoint

Section 4.9
oxidation–reduction (redox) reaction
oxidation state
oxidation
reduction
oxidizing agent (electron acceptor)
reducing agent (electron donor)

Section 4.10
half-reactions

169

Brønsted–Lowry model
• Acid: proton donor
• Base: proton acceptor
Strong acid: completely dissociates into separated H and anions
Weak acid: dissociates to a slight extent

Molarity
䊉 One way to describe solution composition
Molarity 1M2 
䊉
䊉

moles of solute
volume of solution 1L2

Moles solute  volume of solution (L)  molarity
Standard solution: molarity is accurately known

Dilution
䊉 Solvent is added to reduce the molarity
䊉 Moles of solute after dilution  moles of solute before dilution
M1V1  M2V2
Types of equations that describe solution reactions
Formula equation: all reactants and products are written as complete formulas
䊉 Complete ionic equation: all reactants and products that are strong electrolytes are
written as separated ions
䊉 Net ionic equation: only those compounds that undergo a change are written;
spectator ions are not included
䊉

Solubility rules
䊉 Based on experiment observation
䊉 Help predict the outcomes of precipitation reactions
Important types of solution reactions

䊉 Acid–base reactions: involve a transfer of H
ions
䊉 Precipitation reactions: formation of a solid occurs
䊉 Oxidation–reduction reactions: involve electron transfer
Titrations
䊉 Measures the volume of a standard solution (titrant) needed to react with a substance
in solution
䊉 Stoichiometric (equivalence) point: the point at which the required amount of titrant
has been added to exactly react with the substance being analyzed
䊉 Endpoint: the point at which a chemical indicator changes color
Oxidation–reduction reactions
䊉 Oxidation states are assigned using a set of rules to keep track of electron ﬂow
䊉 Oxidation: increase in oxidation state (a loss of electrons)
䊉 Reduction: decrease in oxidation state (a gain of electrons)
䊉 Oxidizing agent: gains electrons (is reduced)
䊉 Reducing agent: loses electrons (is oxidized)
䊉 Equations for oxidation–reduction reactions are usually balanced by the half-reaction
method

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. The (aq) designation listed after a solute indicates the process of hydration. Using KBr(aq) and C2H5OH(aq) as your examples, explain the process of hydration for soluble ionic compounds and for soluble covalent compounds.
2. Characterize strong electrolytes versus weak electrolytes versus nonelectrolytes.
Give examples of each. How do you experimentally determine whether a soluble substance is a strong electrolyte, weak electrolyte, or nonelectrolyte?

3. Distinguish between the terms slightly soluble and weak electrolyte.
4. Molarity is a conversion factor relating moles of solute in solution to the volume of the solution. How does one use molarity as a conversion factor to convert from moles of solute to volume of solution, and from volume of solution to
moles of solute present?
5. What is a dilution? What stays constant in a dilution? Explain why the equation
M1V1  M2V2 works for dilution problems.
6. When the following beakers are mixed, draw a molecular-level representation of
the product mixture (see Fig. 4.17).

+

Na+
Br–
Pb2+
NO3–

+

Al3+
Cl–
K+
OH –

7. Differentiate between the formula equation, the complete ionic equation, and the net
ionic equation. For each reaction in Question 6, write all three balanced equations.
8. What is an acid–base reaction? Strong bases are soluble ionic compounds that
contain the hydroxide ion. List the strong bases. When a strong base reacts with
an acid, what is always produced? Explain the terms titration, stoichiometric
point, neutralization, and standardization.
9. Deﬁne the terms oxidation, reduction, oxidizing agent, and reducing agent.
Given a chemical reaction, how can you tell if it is a redox reaction?
10. What is a half-reaction? Why must the number of electrons lost in the oxidation
equal the number of electrons gained in a reduction? Summarize brieﬂy the
steps in the half-reaction method for balancing redox reactions. What two items
must be balanced in a redox reaction (or any reaction)?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. Assume you have a highly magniﬁed view of a solution of HCl
that allows you to “see” the HCl. Draw this magniﬁed view. If you
dropped in a piece of magnesium, the magnesium would disappear
and hydrogen gas would be released. Represent this change using
symbols for the elements, and write out the balanced equation.
2. You have a solution of table salt in water. What happens to the
salt concentration (increases, decreases, or stays the same) as the
solution boils? Draw pictures to explain your answer.

3. You have a sugar solution (solution A) with concentration x. You
pour one-fourth of this solution into a beaker, and add an equivalent volume of water (solution B).
a. What is the ratio of sugar in solutions A and B?
b. Compare the volumes of solutions A and B.
c. What is the ratio of the concentrations of sugar in solutions
A and B?
4. You add an aqueous solution of lead nitrate to an aqueous solution of potassium iodide. Draw highly magniﬁed views of each
solution individually, and the mixed solution including any product that forms. Write the balanced equation for the reaction.
5. Order the following molecules from lowest to highest oxidation
state of the nitrogen atom: HNO3, NH4Cl, N2O, NO2, NaNO2.
6. Why is it that when something gains electrons, it is said to be
reduced? What is being reduced?

171

Exercises
7. Consider separate aqueous solutions of HCl and H2SO4 with the
same molar concentrations. You wish to neutralize an aqueous
solution of NaOH. For which acid solution would you need to
add more volume (in milliliters) to neutralize the base?
a. the HCl solution
b. the H2SO4 solution
c. You need to know the acid concentrations to answer this
question.
d. You need to know the volume and concentration of the NaOH
solution to answer this question.
e. c and d
Explain.
8. Draw molecular-level pictures to differentiate between concentrated and dilute solutions.
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
9. Differentiate between what happens when the following are dissolved in water.
a. polar solute versus nonpolar solute
b. KF versus C6H12O6
c. RbCl versus AgCl
d. HNO3 versus CO
10. A student wants to prepare 1.00 L of a 1.00 M solution of NaOH
(molar mass  40.00 g/mol). If solid NaOH is available, how
would the student prepare this solution? If 2.00 M NaOH is available, how would the student prepare the solution? To help insure
three signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the NaOH molarity, to how many signiﬁcant ﬁgures should the volumes and mass be determined?
11. List the formulas of three soluble bromide salts and three insoluble bromide salts. Do the same exercise for sulfate salts, hydroxide salts, and phosphate salts (list three soluble salts and
three insoluble salts). List the formulas for six insoluble Pb2
salts and one soluble Pb2 salt.
12. When 1.0 mol of solid lead nitrate is added to 2.0 mol of aqueous
potassium iodide, a yellow precipitate forms. After the precipitate settles to the bottom, does the solution above the precipitate
conduct electricity? Explain. Write the complete ionic equation
to help you answer this question.
13. What is an acid and what is a base? An acid–base reaction is
sometimes called a proton-transfer reaction. Explain.
14. A student had 1.00 L of a 1.00 M acid solution. Much to the surprise of the student, it took 2.00 L of 1.00 M NaOH solution to
react completely with the acid. Explain why it took twice as
much NaOH to react with all of the acid.
In a different experiment, a student had 10.0 mL of 0.020 M
HCl. Again, much to the surprise of the student, it took only
5.00 mL of 0.020 M strong base to react completely with the
HCl. Explain why it took only half as much strong base to react
with all of the HCl.
15. Differentiate between the following terms.
a. species reduced versus the reducing agent
b. species oxidized versus the oxidizing agent
c. oxidation state versus actual charge

16. When balancing reactions in Chapter 3, we did not mention that
reactions must be charge balanced as well as mass balanced.
What do charge balanced and mass balanced mean? How are
redox reactions charge balanced?

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Aqueous Solutions: Strong and Weak Electrolytes
17. Show how each of the following strong electrolytes “breaks up”
into its component ions upon dissolving in water by drawing
molecular-level pictures.
a. NaBr
f. FeSO4
b. MgCl2
g. KMnO4
c. Al(NO3)3
h. HClO4
d. (NH4)2SO4
i. NH4C2H3O2 (ammonium acetate)
e. NaOH
18. Match each name below with the following microscopic pictures
of that compound in aqueous solution.

2–

2+

–

+

2–

–

+
2+

2–

i

–

+
ii

+
+

+
+ 2–
iii

2+

–

–

2+

–

–
iv

a. barium nitrate
c. potassium carbonate
b. sodium chloride
d. magnesium sulfate
Which picture best represents HNO3(aq)? Why aren’t any of the
pictures a good representation of HC2H3O2(aq)?
19. Calcium chloride is a strong electrolyte and is used to “salt”
streets in the winter to melt ice and snow. Write a reaction to
show how this substance breaks apart when it dissolves in water.
20. Commercial cold packs and hot packs are available for treating
athletic injuries. Both types contain a pouch of water and a dry
chemical. When the pack is struck, the pouch of water breaks,
dissolving the chemical, and the solution becomes either hot or
cold. Many hot packs use magnesium sulfate, and many cold
packs use ammonium nitrate. Write reactions to show how these
strong electrolytes break apart when they dissolve in water.

Solution Concentration: Molarity
21. Calculate the molarity of each of these solutions.
a. A 5.623-g sample of NaHCO3 is dissolved in enough water
to make 250.0 mL of solution.
b. A 184.6-mg sample of K2Cr2O7 is dissolved in enough water
to make 500.0 mL of solution.
c. A 0.1025-g sample of copper metal is dissolved in 35 mL of
concentrated HNO3 to form Cu2 ions and then water is added
to make a total volume of 200.0 mL. (Calculate the molarity
of Cu2.)
22. A solution of ethanol (C2H5OH) in water is prepared by dissolving 75.0 mL of ethanol (density  0.79 g/cm3) in enough
water to make 250.0 mL of solution. What is the molarity of the
ethanol in this solution?

172

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

23. Calculate the concentration of all ions present in each of the following solutions of strong electrolytes.
a. 0.100 mol of Ca(NO3)2 in 100.0 mL of solution
b. 2.5 mol of Na2SO4 in 1.25 L of solution
c. 5.00 g of NH4Cl in 500.0 mL of solution
d. 1.00 g K3PO4 in 250.0 mL of solution
24. Calculate the concentration of all ions present in each of the following solutions of strong electrolytes.
a. 0.0200 mol of sodium phosphate in 10.0 mL of solution
b. 0.300 mol of barium nitrate in 600.0 mL of solution
c. 1.00 g of potassium chloride in 0.500 L of solution
d. 132 g of ammonium sulfate in 1.50 L of solution
25. Which of the following solutions of strong electrolytes contains the
largest number of moles of chloride ions: 100.0 mL of 0.30 M
AlCl3, 50.0 mL of 0.60 M MgCl2, or 200.0 mL of 0.40 M NaCl?
26. Which of the following solutions of strong electrolytes contains
the largest number of ions: 100.0 mL of 0.100 M NaOH, 50.0
mL of 0.200 M BaCl2, or 75.0 mL of 0.150 M Na3PO4?
27. What mass of NaOH is contained in 250.0 mL of a 0.400 M
sodium hydroxide solution?
28. If 10. g of AgNO3 is available, what volume of 0.25 M AgNO3
solution can be prepared?
29. Describe how you would prepare 2.00 L of each of the following solutions.
a. 0.250 M NaOH from solid NaOH
b. 0.250 M NaOH from 1.00 M NaOH stock solution
c. 0.100 M K2CrO4 from solid K2CrO4
d. 0.100 M K2CrO4 from 1.75 M K2CrO4 stock solution
30. How would you prepare 1.00 L of a 0.50 M solution of each of
the following?
a. H2SO4 from “concentrated” (18 M) sulfuric acid
b. HCl from “concentrated” (12 M) reagent
c. NiCl2 from the salt NiCl2  6H2O
d. HNO3 from “concentrated” (16 M ) reagent
e. Sodium carbonate from the pure solid
31. A solution is prepared by dissolving 10.8 g ammonium sulfate
in enough water to make 100.0 mL of stock solution. A 10.00-mL
sample of this stock solution is added to 50.00 mL of water.
Calculate the concentration of ammonium ions and sulfate ions
in the ﬁnal solution.
32. Calculate the sodium ion concentration when 70.0 mL of 3.0 M
sodium carbonate is added to 30.0 mL of 1.0 M sodium bicarbonate.
33. A standard solution is prepared for the analysis of ﬂuoxymesterone (C20H29FO3), an anabolic steroid. A stock solution is
ﬁrst prepared by dissolving 10.0 mg of ﬂuoxymesterone in
enough water to give a total volume of 500.0 mL. A 100.0-␮L
aliquot (portion) of this solution is diluted to a ﬁnal volume of
100.0 mL. Calculate the concentration of the ﬁnal solution in
terms of molarity.
34. A stock solution containing Mn2 ions was prepared by dissolving 1.584 g pure manganese metal in nitric acid and diluting to a ﬁnal volume of 1.000 L. The following solutions were
then prepared by dilution:
For solution A, 50.00 mL of stock solution was diluted to
1000.0 mL.

For solution B, 10.00 mL of solution A was diluted to 250.0 mL.
For solution C, 10.00 mL of solution B was diluted to 500.0 mL.
Calculate the concentrations of the stock solution and solutions
A, B, and C.

Precipitation Reactions
35. On the basis of the general solubility rules given in Table 4.1,
predict which of the following substances are likely to be soluble in water.
a. aluminum nitrate
b. magnesium chloride
c. rubidium sulfate
d. nickel(II) hydroxide
e. lead(II) sulﬁde
f. magnesium hydroxide
g. iron(III) phosphate
36. On the basis of the general solubility rules given in Table 4.1,
predict which of the following substances are likely to be soluble
in water.
a. zinc chloride
b. lead(II) nitrate
c. lead(II) sulfate
d. sodium iodide
e. cobalt(III) sulﬁde
f. chromium(III) hydroxide
g. magnesium carbonate
h. ammonium carbonate
37. When the following solutions are mixed together, what precipitate (if any) will form?
a. FeSO4 1aq2  KCl1aq2
b. Al1NO3 2 3 1aq2  Ba1OH2 2 1aq2
c. CaCl2 1aq2  Na2SO4 1aq2
d. K2S1aq2  Ni1NO3 2 2 1aq2
38. When the following solutions are mixed together, what precipitate (if any) will form?
a. Hg2 1NO3 2 2 1aq2  CuSO4 1aq2
b. Ni1NO3 2 2 1aq2  CaCl2 1aq2
c. K2CO3 1aq2  MgI2 1aq2
d. Na2CrO4 1aq2  AlBr3 1aq2
39. For the reactions in Exercise 37, write the balanced formula
equation, complete ionic equation, and net ionic equation. If no
precipitate forms, write “No reaction.”
40. For the reactions in Exercise 38, write the balanced formula
equation, complete ionic equation, and net ionic equation. If no
precipitate forms, write “No reaction.”
41. Write the balanced formula and net ionic equation for the reaction
that occurs when the contents of the two beakers are added together. What colors represent the spectator ions in each reaction?

+

a.

Cu2+
SO42–
Na+
S2–

Exercises

+

Co2+
Cl–
Na+
OH –

+

Ag+
NO3–
K+
I–

b.

c.

42. Give an example how each of the following insoluble ionic compounds could be produced using a precipitation reaction. Write
the balanced formula equation for each reaction.
a. Fe(OH)3(s)
c. PbSO4(s)
b. Hg2Cl2(s)
d. BaCrO4(s)
43. Write net ionic equations for the reaction, if any, that occurs
when aqueous solutions of the following are mixed.
a. ammonium sulfate and barium nitrate
b. lead(II) nitrate and sodium chloride
c. sodium phosphate and potassium nitrate
d. sodium bromide and rubidium chloride
e. copper(II) chloride and sodium hydroxide
44. Write net ionic equations for the reaction, if any, that occurs
when aqueous solutions of the following are mixed.
a. chromium(III) chloride and sodium hydroxide
b. silver nitrate and ammonium carbonate
c. copper(II) sulfate and mercury(I) nitrate
d. strontium nitrate and potassium iodide
45. Separate samples of a solution of an unknown soluble ionic
compound are treated with KCl, Na2SO4, and NaOH. A precipitate forms only when Na2SO4 is added. Which cations could be
present in the unknown soluble ionic compound?
46. A sample may contain any or all of the following ions: Hg22,
Ba2, and Mn2.
a. No precipitate formed when an aqueous solution of NaCl was
added to the sample solution.
b. No precipitate formed when an aqueous solution of Na2SO4
was added to the sample solution.
c. A precipitate formed when the sample solution was made
basic with NaOH.
Which ion or ions are present in the sample solution?
47. What mass of Na2CrO4 is required to precipitate all of the silver ions from 75.0 mL of a 0.100 M solution of AgNO3?
48. What volume of 0.100 M Na3PO4 is required to precipitate all
the lead(II) ions from 150.0 mL of 0.250 M Pb(NO3)2?
49. What mass of solid aluminum hydroxide can be produced
when 50.0 mL of 0.200 M Al(NO3)3 is added to 200.0 mL of
0.100 M KOH?
50. What mass of barium sulfate can be produced when 100.0 mL
of a 0.100 M solution of barium chloride is mixed with 100.0
mL of a 0.100 M solution of iron(III) sulfate?

173

51. How many grams of silver chloride can be prepared by the
reaction of 100.0 mL of 0.20 M silver nitrate with 100.0 mL of
0.15 M calcium chloride? Calculate the concentrations of each
ion remaining in solution after precipitation is complete.
52. The drawings below represent aqueous solutions. Solution A
is 2.00 L of a 2.00 M aqueous solution of copper(II) nitrate. Solution
B is 2.00 L of a 3.00 M aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide.

Cu2+
NO3–

A

K+
OH–

B

a. Draw a picture of the solution made by mixing solutions A
and B together after the precipitation reaction takes place.
Make sure this picture shows the correct relative volume compared to solutions A and B, and the correct relative number of
ions, along with the correct relative amount of solid formed.
b. Determine the concentrations (in M) of all ions left in solution (from part a) and the mass of solid formed.
53. A 1.42-g sample of a pure compound, with formula M2SO4, was
dissolved in water and treated with an excess of aqueous calcium
chloride, resulting in the precipitation of all the sulfate ions as
calcium sulfate. The precipitate was collected, dried, and found
to weigh 1.36 g. Determine the atomic mass of M, and identify M.
54. You are given a 1.50-g mixture of sodium nitrate and sodium
chloride. You dissolve this mixture into 100 mL of water and
then add an excess of 0.500 M silver nitrate solution. You produce a white solid, which you then collect, dry, and measure.
The white solid has a mass of 0.641 g.
a. If you had an extremely magniﬁed view of the solution (to
the atomic-molecular level), list the species you would see
(include charges, if any).
b. Write the balanced net ionic equation for the reaction that
produces the solid. Include phases and charges.
c. Calculate the percent sodium chloride in the original unknown
mixture.

Acid–Base Reactions
55. Write the balanced formula, complete ionic, and net ionic equations for each of the following acid–base reactions.
a. HClO4 1aq2  Mg1OH2 2 1s2 S
b. HCN1aq2  NaOH1aq2 S
c. HCl1aq2  NaOH1aq2 S
56. Write the balanced formula, complete ionic, and net ionic equations for each of the following acid–base reactions.
a. HNO3 1aq2  Al1OH2 3 1s2 S
b. HC2H3O2 1aq2  KOH1aq2 S
c. Ca1OH2 2 1aq2  HCl1aq2 S
57. Write the balanced formula, complete ionic, and net ionic equations for the reactions that occur when the following are mixed.
a. potassium hydroxide (aqueous) and nitric acid
b. barium hydroxide (aqueous) and hydrochloric acid
c. perchloric acid [HClO4(aq)] and solid iron(III) hydroxide

174

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

58. Write the balanced formula, complete ionic, and net ionic
equations for the reactions that occur when the following are
mixed.
a. solid silver hydroxide and hydrobromic acid
b. aqueous strontium hydroxide and hydroiodic acid
c. solid chromium(III) hydroxide and nitric acid
59. What volume of each of the following acids will react completely
with 50.00 mL of 0.200 M NaOH?
a. 0.100 M HCl
b. 0.150 M HNO3
c. 0.200 M HC2H3O2 (1 acidic hydrogen)
60. What volume of each of the following bases will react completely with 25.00 mL of 0.200 M HCl?
a. 0.100 M NaOH
b. 0.0500 M Ba(OH)2
c. 0.250 M KOH
61. Hydrochloric acid (75.0 mL of 0.250 M) is added to 225.0 mL
of 0.0550 M Ba(OH)2 solution. What is the concentration of the
excess H or OH ions left in this solution?
62. A student mixes four reagents together, thinking that the solutions will neutralize each other. The solutions mixed together are
50.0 mL of 0.100 M hydrochloric acid, 100.0 mL of 0.200 M of
nitric acid, 500.0 mL of 0.0100 M calcium hydroxide, and
200.0 mL of 0.100 M rubidium hydroxide. Is the resulting
solution neutral? If not, calculate the concentration of excess H
or OH ions left in solution.
63. A 25.00-mL sample of hydrochloric acid solution requires
24.16 mL of 0.106 M sodium hydroxide for complete neutralization. What is the concentration of the original hydrochloric
acid solution?
64. What volume of 0.0200 M calcium hydroxide is required to neutralize 35.00 mL of 0.0500 M nitric acid?
65. A student titrates an unknown amount of potassium hydrogen
phthalate (KHC8H4O4, often abbreviated KHP) with 20.46 mL
of a 0.1000 M NaOH solution. KHP (molar mass  204.22
g/mol) has one acidic hydrogen. What mass of KHP was
titrated (reacted completely) by the sodium hydroxide
solution?
66. The concentration of a certain sodium hydroxide solution was
determined by using the solution to titrate a sample of potassium
hydrogen phthalate (abbreviated as KHP). KHP is an acid with
one acidic hydrogen and a molar mass of 204.22 g/mol. In the
titration, 34.67 mL of the sodium hydroxide solution was required to react with 0.1082 g KHP. Calculate the molarity of the
sodium hydroxide.

Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
67. Assign oxidation states for all atoms in each of the following
compounds.
a. KMnO4
f. Fe3O4
b. NiO2
g. XeOF4
c. Na4Fe(OH)6
h. SF4
d. (NH4)2HPO4
i. CO
e. P4O6
j. C6H12O6

68. Assign oxidation states for all atoms in each of the following
compounds.
a. UO22
f. Mg2P2O7
b. As2O3
g. Na2S2O3
c. NaBiO3
h. Hg2Cl2
d. As4
i. Ca(NO3)2
e. HAsO2
69. Assign the oxidation state for nitrogen in each of the following.
a. Li3N
f. NO2
b. NH3
g. NO2
c. N2H4
h. NO3
d. NO
i. N2
e. N2O
70. Assign oxidation numbers to all the atoms in each of the
following.
a. SrCr2O7
g. PbSO3
b. CuCl2
h. PbO2
c. O2
i. Na2C2O4
d. H2O2
j. CO2
e. MgCO3
k. (NH4)2Ce(SO4)3
f. Ag
l. Cr2O3
71. Specify which of the following are oxidation–reduction reactions,
and identify the oxidizing agent, the reducing agent, the substance being oxidized, and the substance being reduced.
a. Cu1s2  2Ag 1aq2 S 2Ag1s2  Cu2 1aq2
b. HCl1g2  NH3 1g2 S NH4Cl1s2
c. SiCl4 1l2  2H2O1l2 S 4HCl1aq2  SiO2 1s2
d. SiCl4 1l2  2Mg1s2 S 2MgCl2 1s2  Si1s2
e. Al1OH2 4 1aq2 S AlO2 1aq2  2H2O1l2
72. Specify which of the following equations represent oxidation–
reduction reactions, and indicate the oxidizing agent, the reducing
agent, the species being oxidized, and the species being reduced.
a. CH4 1g2  H2O1g2 S CO1g2  3H2 1g2
b. 2AgNO3 1aq2  Cu1s2 S Cu1NO3 2 2 1aq2  2Ag1s2
c. Zn1s2  2HCl1aq2 S ZnCl2 1aq2  H2 1g2
d. 2H  1aq2  2CrO42 1aq2 S Cr2O72 1aq2  H2O1l2
73. Balance the following oxidation–reduction reactions that occur
in acidic solution.
a. Zn1s2  HCl1aq2 S Zn2 1aq2  H2 1g2  Cl 1aq2
b. I 1aq2  ClO 1aq2 S I3 1aq2  Cl 1aq2
c. As2O3 1s2  NO3 1aq2 S H3AsO4 1aq2  NO1g2
d. Br 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2 S Br2 1l2  Mn2 1aq2
e. CH3OH1aq2  Cr2O72 1aq2 S CH2O1aq2  Cr3 1aq2
74. Balance the following oxidation–reduction reactions that occur
in acidic solution using the half-reaction method.
a. Cu1s2  NO3 1aq2 S Cu2 1aq2  NO1g2
b. Cr2O72 1aq2  Cl 1aq2 S Cr3 1aq2  Cl2 1g2
c. Pb1s2  PbO2 1s2  H2SO4 1aq2 S PbSO4 1s2
d. Mn2 1aq2  NaBiO3 1s2 S Bi3 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2
e. H3AsO4 1aq2  Zn1s2 S AsH3 1g2  Zn2 1aq2
75. Balance the following oxidation–reduction reactions that occur
in basic solution.
a. Al1s2  MnO4 1aq2 S MnO2 1s2  Al1OH2 4 1aq2
b. Cl2 1g2 S Cl 1aq2  OCl 1aq2
c. NO2 1aq2  Al1s2 S NH3 1g2  AlO2 1aq2

Additional Exercises
76. Balance the following oxidation–reduction reactions that occur
in basic solution.
a. Cr1s2  CrO42 1aq2 S Cr1OH2 3 1s2
b. MnO4 1aq2  S2 1aq2 S MnS1s2  S1s2
c. CN 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2 S CNO 1aq2  MnO2 1s2
77. Chlorine gas was ﬁrst prepared in 1774 by C. W. Scheele by
oxidizing sodium chloride with manganese(IV) oxide. The reaction is
NaCl1aq2  H2SO4 1aq2  MnO2 1s2 ¡
Na2SO4 1aq2  MnCl2 1aq2  H2O1l2  Cl2 1g2
Balance this equation.
78. Gold metal will not dissolve in either concentrated nitric acid or
concentrated hydrochloric acid. It will dissolve, however, in aqua
regia, a mixture of the two concentrated acids. The products of
the reaction are the AuCl4 ion and gaseous NO. Write a balanced equation for the dissolution of gold in aqua regia.

Additional Exercises
79. Which of the following statements is (are) true? For the false
statements, correct them.
a. A concentrated solution in water will always contain a strong
or weak electrolyte.
b. A strong electrolyte will break up into ions when dissolved
in water.
c. An acid is a strong electrolyte.
d. All ionic compounds are strong electrolytes in water.
80. A 230.-mL sample of a 0.275 M CaCl2 solution is left on a hot plate
overnight; the following morning, the solution is 1.10 M. What
volume of water evaporated from the 0.275 M CaCl2 solution?
81. Using the general solubility rules given in Table 4.1, name three
reagents that would form precipitates with each of the following
ions in aqueous solution. Write the net ionic equation for each
of your suggestions.
a. chloride ion
d. sulfate ion
b. calcium ion
e. mercury(I) ion, Hg22
c. iron(III) ion
f. silver ion
82. Consider a 1.50-g mixture of magnesium nitrate and magnesium
chloride. After dissolving this mixture in water, 0.500 M silver
nitrate is added dropwise until precipitate formation is complete.
The mass of the white precipitate formed is 0.641 g.
a. Calculate the mass percent of magnesium chloride in the
mixture.
b. Determine the minimum volume of silver nitrate that must have
been added to ensure complete formation of the precipitate.
83. A 1.00-g sample of an alkaline earth metal chloride is treated
with excess silver nitrate. All of the chloride is recovered as
1.38 g of silver chloride. Identify the metal.
84. A mixture contains only NaCl and Al2(SO4)3. A 1.45-g sample
of the mixture is dissolved in water and an excess of NaOH is
added, producing a precipitate of Al(OH)3. The precipitate is ﬁltered, dried, and weighed. The mass of the precipitate is 0.107
g. What is the mass percent of Al2(SO4)3 in the sample?
85. Saccharin (C7H5NO3S) is sometimes dispensed in tablet form.
Ten tablets with a total mass of 0.5894 g were dissolved in water. They were oxidized to convert all the sulfur to sulfate ion,

175

which was precipitated by adding an excess of barium chloride
solution. The mass of BaSO4 obtained was 0.5032 g. What is the
average mass of saccharin per tablet? What is the average mass
percent of saccharin in the tablets?
86. A mixture contains only NaCl and Fe(NO3)3. A 0.456-g sample of
the mixture is dissolved in water, and an excess of NaOH is added,
producing a precipitate of Fe(OH)3. The precipitate is ﬁltered, dried,
and weighed. Its mass is 0.107 g. Calculate the following.
a. the mass of iron in the sample
b. the mass of Fe(NO3)3 in the sample
c. the mass percent of Fe(NO3)3 in the sample
87. A student added 50.0 mL of an NaOH solution to 100.0 mL
of 0.400 M HCl. The solution was then treated with an excess of
aqueous chromium(III) nitrate, resulting in formation of 2.06 g of
precipitate. Determine the concentration of the NaOH solution.
88. What acid and what strong base would react in aqueous solution
to produce the following salts in the formula equation? Write the
balanced formula equation for each reaction.
a. potassium perchlorate
b. cesium nitrate
c. calcium iodide
89. A 10.00-mL sample of vinegar, an aqueous solution of acetic
acid (HC2H3O2), is titrated with 0.5062 M NaOH, and 16.58 mL
is required to reach the equivalence point.
a. What is the molarity of the acetic acid?
b. If the density of the vinegar is 1.006 g/cm3, what is the mass
percent of acetic acid in the vinegar?
90. When hydrochloric acid reacts with magnesium metal, hydrogen gas and aqueous magnesium chloride are produced. What
volume of 5.0 M HCl is required to react completely with 3.00 g
of magnesium?
91. A 2.20-g sample of an unknown acid (empirical formula 
C3H4O3) is dissolved in 1.0 L of water. A titration required
25.0 mL of 0.500 M NaOH to react completely with all the
acid present. Assuming the unknown acid has one acidic proton
per molecule, what is the molecular formula of the unknown
acid?
92. Carminic acid, a naturally occurring red pigment extracted from
the cochineal insect, contains only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
It was commonly used as a dye in the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth
century. It is 53.66% C and 4.09% H by mass. A titration required
18.02 mL of 0.0406 M NaOH to neutralize 0.3602 g carminic acid.
Assuming that there is only one acidic hydrogen per molecule,
what is the molecular formula of carminic acid?
93. A 30.0-mL sample of an unknown strong base is neutralized after
the addition of 12.0 mL of a 0.150 M HNO3 solution. If the
unknown base concentration is 0.0300 M, give some possible
identities for the unknown base.
94. Many oxidation–reduction reactions can be balanced by inspection. Try to balance the following reactions by inspection. In each
reaction, identify the substance reduced and the substance
oxidized.
a. Al1s2  HCl1aq2 S AlCl3 1aq2  H2 1g2
b. CH4 1g2  S1s2 S CS2 1l2  H2S1g2
c. C3H8 1g2  O2 1g2 S CO2 1g2  H2O1l2
d. Cu1s2  Ag 1aq2 S Ag1s2  Cu2 1aq2

176

Chapter Four Types of Chemical Reactions and Solution Stoichiometry

95. One of the classical methods for the determination of the manganese content in steel is to convert all the manganese to the
deeply colored permanganate ion and then to measure the absorption of light. The steel is dissolved in nitric acid, producing
the manganese(II) ion and nitrogen dioxide gas. This solution is
then reacted with an acidic solution containing periodate ion; the
products are the permanganate and iodate ions. Write balanced
chemical equations for both these steps.

Challenge Problems
96. The units of parts per million (ppm) and parts per billion (ppb)
are commonly used by environmental chemists. In general,
1 ppm means 1 part of solute for every 106 parts of solution.
Mathematically, by mass:
ppm 

mg solute
mg solute

g solution
kg solution

In the case of very dilute aqueous solutions, a concentration of
1.0 ppm is equal to 1.0 ␮g of solute per 1.0 mL, which equals
1.0 g solution. Parts per billion is deﬁned in a similar fashion.
Calculate the molarity of each of the following aqueous
solutions.
a. 5.0 ppb Hg in H2O
b. 1.0 ppb CHCl3 in H2O
c. 10.0 ppm As in H2O
d. 0.10 ppm DDT (C14H9Cl5) in H2O
97. In most of its ionic compounds, cobalt is either Co(II) or Co(III).
One such compound, containing chloride ion and waters of hydration, was analyzed, and the following results were obtained.
A 0.256-g sample of the compound was dissolved in water, and
excess silver nitrate was added. The silver chloride was ﬁltered,
dried, and weighed, and it had a mass of 0.308 g. A second sample of 0.416 g of the compound was dissolved in water, and an
excess of sodium hydroxide was added. The hydroxide salt was
ﬁltered and heated in a ﬂame, forming cobalt(III) oxide. The
mass of cobalt(III) oxide formed was 0.145 g.
a. What is the percent composition, by mass, of the compound?
b. Assuming the compound contains one cobalt atom per formula unit, what is the molecular formula?
c. Write balanced equations for the three reactions described.
98. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) have been used extensively
as dielectric materials in electrical transformers. Because PCBs
have been shown to be potentially harmful, analysis for their
presence in the environment has become very important. PCBs
are manufactured according to the following generic reaction:
C12H10  nCl2 S C12H10nCln  nHCl
This reaction results in a mixture of PCB products. The mixture
is analyzed by decomposing the PCBs and then precipitating the
resulting Cl as AgCl.
a. Develop a general equation that relates the average value of
n to the mass of a given mixture of PCBs and the mass of
AgCl produced.
b. A 0.1947-g sample of a commercial PCB yielded 0.4791 g
of AgCl. What is the average value of n for this sample?
99. You have two 500.0 mL aqueous solutions. Solution A is a solution of silver nitrate, and solution B is a solution of potassium
chromate. The masses of the solutes in each of the solutions are

the same. When the solutions are added together, a blood-red
precipitate forms. After the reaction has gone to completion, you
dry the solid and ﬁnd that it has a mass of 331.8 g.
a. Calculate the concentration of the potassium ions in the original potassium chromate solution.
b. Calculate the concentration of the chromate ions in the ﬁnal
solution.
100. A sample is a mixture of KCl and KBr. When 0.1024 g of the
sample is dissolved in water and reacted with excess silver
nitrate, 0.1889 g solid is obtained. What is the composition by
mass percent of the original mixture?
101. You are given a solid that is a mixture of Na2SO4 and K2SO4. A
0.205-g sample of the mixture is dissolved in water. An excess
of an aqueous solution of BaCl2 is added. The BaSO4 that is
formed is ﬁltered, dried, and weighed. Its mass is 0.298 g. What
mass of SO42 ion is in the sample? What is the mass percent
of SO42 ion in the sample? What are the percent compositions
by mass of Na2SO4 and K2SO4 in the sample?
102. Zinc and magnesium metal each react with hydrochloric acid according to the following equations:
Zn1s2  2HCl1aq2 ¡ ZnCl2 1aq2  H2 1g2

Mg1s2  2HCl1aq2 ¡ MgCl2 1aq2  H2 1g2
A 10.00-g mixture of zinc and magnesium is reacted with the
stoichiometric amount of hydrochloric acid. The reaction mixture is then reacted with 156 mL of 3.00 M silver nitrate to produce the maximum possible amount of silver chloride.
a. Determine the percent magnesium by mass in the original
mixture.
b. If 78.0 mL of HCl was added, what was the concentration of
the HCl?
103. You made 100.0 mL of a lead(II) nitrate solution for lab but forgot
to cap it. The next lab session you noticed that there was only
80.0 mL left (the rest had evaporated). In addition, you forgot the
initial concentration of the solution. You decide to take 2.00 mL
of the solution and add an excess of a concentrated sodium chloride solution. You obtain a solid with a mass of 3.407 g. What was
the concentration of the original lead(II) nitrate solution?
104. Consider reacting copper(II) sulfate with iron. Two possible
reactions can occur, as represented by the following equations.
copper1II2 sulfate1aq2  iron1s2 ¡
copper1s2  iron1II2 sulfate1aq2
copper1II2 sulfate1aq2  iron1s2 ¡
copper1s2  iron1III2 sulfate1aq2
You place 87.7 mL of a 0.500 M solution of copper(II) sulfate
in a beaker. You then add 2.00 g of iron ﬁlings to the copper(II)
sulfate solution. After one of the above reactions occurs, you isolate 2.27 g of copper. Which equation above describes the reaction that occurred? Support your answer.
105. Consider an experiment in which two burets, Y and Z, are simultaneously draining into a beaker that initially contained 275.0 mL
of 0.300 M HCl. Buret Y contains 0.150 M NaOH and buret Z
contains 0.250 M KOH. The stoichiometric point in the titration
is reached 60.65 minutes after Y and Z were started simultaneously. The total volume in the beaker at the stoichiometric point
is 655 mL. Calculate the ﬂow rates of burets Y and Z. Assume
the ﬂow rates remain constant during the experiment.

Marathon Problems
106. Complete and balance each acid–base reaction.
a. H3PO4 1aq2  NaOH1aq2 S
Contains three acidic hydrogens
b. H2SO4 1aq2  Al1OH2 3 1s2 S
Contains two acidic hydrogens
c. H2Se1aq2  Ba1OH2 2 1aq2 S
Contains two acidic hydrogens
d. H2C2O4 1aq2  NaOH1aq2 S
Contains two acidic hydrogens
107. What volume of 0.0521 M Ba(OH)2 is required to neutralize exactly 14.20 mL of 0.141 M H3PO4? Phosphoric acid contains
three acidic hydrogens.
108. A 10.00-mL sample of sulfuric acid from an automobile battery
requires 35.08 mL of 2.12 M sodium hydroxide solution for
complete neutralization. What is the molarity of the sulfuric acid?
Sulfuric acid contains two acidic hydrogens.
109. Some of the substances commonly used in stomach antacids are
MgO, Mg(OH)2, and Al(OH)3.
a. Write a balanced equation for the neutralization of hydrochloric acid by each of these substances.
b. Which of these substances will neutralize the greatest amount
of 0.10 M HCl per gram?
110. A 6.50-g sample of a diprotic acid requires 137.5 mL of a
0.750 M NaOH solution for complete reaction. Determine the
molar mass of the acid.
111. Citric acid, which can be obtained from lemon juice, has the
molecular formula C6H8O7. A 0.250-g sample of citric acid dissolved in 25.0 mL of water requires 37.2 mL of 0.105 M NaOH
for complete neutralization. What number of acidic hydrogens
per molecule does citric acid have?
112. Balance the following equations by the half-reaction method.
a. Fe1s2  HCl1aq2 S HFeCl4 1aq2  H2 1g2
b. IO3 1aq2  I 1aq2 ¡ I3 1aq2
Acid

c. Cr1NCS2 64 1aq2  Ce4 1aq2 ¡
Cr3 1aq2  Ce3 1aq2  NO3 1aq2  CO2 1g2  SO42 1aq2
Acid

d. CrI3 1s2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ CrO42 1aq2  IO4 1aq2  Cl 1aq2
Base

e. Fe1CN2 64 1aq2  Ce4 1aq2 ¡
Ce1OH2 3 1s2  Fe1OH2 3 1s2  CO32 1aq2  NO3 1aq2
Base

f. Fe1OH2 2 1s2  H2O2 1aq2 ¡ Fe1OH2 3 1s2
113. It took 25.06 0.05 mL of a sodium hydroxide solution to titrate a
0.4016-g sample of KHP (see Exercise 65). Calculate the concentration and uncertainty in the concentration of the sodium hydroxide
solution. (See Appendix 1.5.) Neglect any uncertainty in the mass.
Base

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

114. Tris(pentaﬂuorophenyl)borane, commonly known by its acronym
BARF, is frequently used to initiate polymerization of ethylene
or propylene in the presence of a catalytic transition metal compound. It is composed solely of C, F, and B; it is 42.23% C by
mass and 55.66% F by mass.
a. What is the empirical formula of BARF?
b. A 2.251-g sample of BARF dissolved in 347.0 mL of solution
produces a 0.01267 M solution. What is the molecular formula of BARF?

177

115. In a 1-L beaker, 203 mL of 0.307 M ammonium chromate was
mixed with 137 mL of 0.269 M chromium(III) nitrite to produce
ammonium nitrite and chromium(III) chromate. Write the balanced
chemical reaction occurring here. If the percent yield of the reaction was 88.0%, how much chromium(III) chromate was isolated?
116. The vanadium in a sample of ore is converted to VO2. The VO2
ion is subsequently titrated with MnO4 in acidic solution to
form V(OH)4 and manganese(II) ion. To titrate the solution,
26.45 mL of 0.02250 M MnO4 was required. If the mass percent of vanadium in the ore was 58.1%, what was the mass of
the ore sample? Which of the four transition metal ions in this
titration has the highest oxidation state?
117. The unknown acid H2X can be neutralized completely by OH
according to the following (unbalanced) equation:
H2X1aq2  OH ¡ X2  H2O
The ion formed as a product, X2, was shown to have 36 total
electrons. What is element X? Propose a name for H2X? To
completely neutralize a sample of H2X, 35.6 mL of 0.175 M OH
solution was required. What was the mass of the H2X sample used?

Marathon Problems
These problems are designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

118. Three students were asked to ﬁnd the identity of the metal in a
particular sulfate salt. They dissolved a 0.1472-g sample of
the salt in water and treated it with excess barium chloride,
resulting in the precipitation of barium sulfate. After the precipitate had been ﬁltered and dried, it weighed 0.2327 g.
Each student analyzed the data independently and came to
different conclusions. Pat decided that the metal was titanium.
Chris thought it was sodium. Randy reported that it was gallium.
What formula did each student assign to the sulfate salt?
Look for information on the sulfates of gallium, sodium, and
titanium in this text and reference books such as the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. What further tests would you
suggest to determine which student is most likely correct?
119. You have two 500.0-mL aqueous solutions. Solution A is a solution of a metal nitrate that is 8.246% nitrogen by mass. The
ionic compound in solution B consists of potassium, chromium,
and oxygen; chromium has an oxidation state of 6 and there
are 2 potassiums and 1 chromium in the formula. The masses of
the solutes in each of the solutions are the same. When the solutions are added together, a blood-red precipitate forms. After
the reaction has gone to completion, you dry the solid and ﬁnd
that it has a mass of 331.8 g.
a. Identify the ionic compounds in solution A and solution B.
b. Identify the blood-red precipitate.
c. Calculate the concentration (molarity) of all ions in the original solutions.
d. Calculate the concentration (molarity) of all ions in the ﬁnal
solution.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

5 Gases
Contents
5.1 Pressure
• Units of Pressure
5.2 The Gas Laws of Boyle,
Charles, and Avogadro
• Boyle’s Law
• Charles’s Law
• Avogadro’s Law
5.3 The Ideal Gas Law
5.4 Gas Stoichiometry
• Molar Mass of a Gas
5.5 Dalton’s Law of Partial
Pressures
• Collecting a Gas over Water
5.6 The Kinetic Molecular
Theory of Gases
• Pressure and Volume (Boyle’s
Law)
• Pressure and Temperature
• Volume and Temperature
(Charles’s Law)
• Volume and Number of
Moles (Avogadro’s Law)
• Mixture of Gases (Dalton’s
Law)
• Deriving the Ideal Gas Law
• The Meaning of Temperature
• Root Mean Square Velocity
5.7 Effusion and Diffusion
• Effusion
• Diffusion
5.8 Real Gases
5.9 Characteristics of Several
Real Gases
5.10 Chemistry in the Atmosphere

The steaming fumaroles located in Bjarnarﬂag, Iceland release a variety of gases.

178

M

atter exists in three distinct physical states: gas, liquid, and solid. Although relatively few substances exist in the gaseous state under typical conditions, gases are very
important. For example, we live immersed in a gaseous solution. The earth’s atmosphere
is a mixture of gases that consists mainly of elemental nitrogen (N2) and oxygen (O2).
The atmosphere both supports life and acts as a waste receptacle for the exhaust gases
that accompany many industrial processes. The chemical reactions of these waste gases
in the atmosphere lead to various types of pollution, including smog and acid rain. The
gases in the atmosphere also shield us from harmful radiation from the sun and keep the
earth warm by reﬂecting heat radiation back toward the earth. In fact, there is now great
concern that an increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide, a product of the combustion of
fossil fuels, is causing a dangerous warming of the earth.
In this chapter we will look carefully at the properties of gases. First we will see how
measurements of gas properties lead to various types of laws—statements that show how
the properties are related to each other. Then we will construct a model to explain why gases
behave as they do. This model will show how the behavior of the individual particles of a
gas leads to the observed properties of the gas itself (a collection of many, many particles).
The study of gases provides an excellent example of the scientiﬁc method in action.
It illustrates how observations lead to natural laws, which in turn can be accounted for by
models.

5.1

As a gas, water occupies 1200 times as
much space as it does as a liquid at
25C and atmospheric pressure.

Pressure

A gas uniformly ﬁlls any container, is easily compressed, and mixes completely with any
other gas. One of the most obvious properties of a gas is that it exerts pressure on its surroundings. For example, when you blow up a balloon, the air inside pushes against the
elastic sides of the balloon and keeps it ﬁrm.
As mentioned earlier, the gases most familiar to us form the earth’s atmosphere. The
pressure exerted by this gaseous mixture that we call air can be dramatically demonstrated
by the experiment shown in Fig. 5.1. A small volume of water is placed in a metal can,

Visualization: Collapsing Can

FIGURE 5.1
The pressure exerted by the gases in the atmosphere can be demonstrated by boiling
water in a large metal can (a) and then
turning off the heat and sealing the can. As
the can cools, the water vapor condenses,
lowering the gas pressure inside the can.
This causes the can to crumple (b).

179

180

Chapter Five

Gases

Vacuum

h = 760 mm Hg
for standard
atmosphere

FIGURE 5.2
A torricellian barometer. The tube, completely ﬁlled with mercury, is inverted in a
dish of mercury. Mercury ﬂows out of the
tube until the pressure of the column of
mercury (shown by the black arrow) “standing on the surface” of the mercury in the
dish is equal to the pressure of the air
(shown by the purple arrows) on the rest of
the surface of the mercury in the dish.

Soon after Torricelli died, a German
physicist named Otto von Guericke invented an air pump. In a famous demonstration for the King of Prussia in 1663,
Guericke placed two hemispheres together, pumped the air out of the resulting sphere through a valve, and showed
that teams of horses could not pull the
hemispheres apart. Then, after secretly
opening the air valve, Guericke easily
separated the hemispheres by hand. The
King of Prussia was so impressed that he
awarded Guericke a lifetime pension!

and the water is boiled, which ﬁlls the can with steam. The can is then sealed and allowed
to cool. Why does the can collapse as it cools? It is the atmospheric pressure that crumples the can. When the can is cooled after being sealed so that no air can ﬂow in, the water vapor (steam) condenses to a very small volume of liquid water. As a gas, the water
ﬁlled the can, but when it is condensed to a liquid, the liquid does not come close to ﬁlling the can. The H2O molecules formerly present as a gas are now collected in a very
small volume of liquid, and there are very few molecules of gas left to exert pressure outward and counteract the air pressure. As a result, the pressure exerted by the gas molecules in the atmosphere smashes the can.
A device to measure atmospheric pressure, the barometer, was invented in 1643 by
an Italian scientist named Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647), who had been a student of
Galileo. Torricelli’s barometer is constructed by ﬁlling a glass tube with liquid mercury
and inverting it in a dish of mercury, as shown in Fig. 5.2. Notice that a large quantity of
mercury stays in the tube. In fact, at sea level the height of this column of mercury averages 760 mm. Why does this mercury stay in the tube, seemingly in deﬁance of gravity?
Figure 5.2 illustrates how the pressure exerted by the atmospheric gases on the surface of
mercury in the dish keeps the mercury in the tube.
Atmospheric pressure results from the mass of the air being pulled toward the center
of the earth by gravity—in other words, it results from the weight of the air. Changing
weather conditions cause the atmospheric pressure to vary, so the height of the column of
Hg supported by the atmosphere at sea level varies; it is not always 760 mm. The meteorologist who says a “low” is approaching means that the atmospheric pressure is going
to decrease. This condition often occurs in conjunction with a storm.
Atmospheric pressure also varies with altitude. For example, when Torricelli’s experiment is done in Breckenridge, Colorado (elevation 9600 feet), the atmosphere supports a column of mercury only about 520 mm high because the air is “thinner.” That is,
there is less air pushing down on the earth’s surface at Breckenridge than at sea level.

Units of Pressure
Because instruments used for measuring pressure, such as the manometer (Fig. 5.3), often contain mercury, the most commonly used units for pressure are based on the height
Atmospheric
pressure (Patm )

Atmospheric
pressure (Patm )

h

FIGURE 5.3
A simple manometer, a device for measuring the pressure of a gas in a container. The
pressure of the gas is given by h (the difference in mercury levels) in units of torr
(equivalent to mm Hg). (a) Gas pressure 
atmospheric pressure  h. (b) Gas
pressure  atmospheric pressure  h.

h

Gas
pressure (Pgas )
less than
atmospheric
pressure

Gas
pressure (Pgas )
greater than
atmospheric
pressure

Pgas = Patm – h
(a)

Pgas = Patm + h
(b)

5.2

The Gas Laws of Boyle, Charles, and Avogadro

181

of the mercury column (in millimeters) that the gas pressure can support. The unit mm
Hg (millimeter of mercury) is often called the torr in honor of Torricelli. The terms torr
and mm Hg are used interchangeably by chemists. A related unit for pressure is the
standard atmosphere (abbreviated atm):
1 standard atmosphere  1 atm  760 mm Hg  760 torr
However, since pressure is deﬁned as force per unit area,
Pressure 

force
area

the fundamental units of pressure involve units of force divided by units of area. In the
SI system, the unit of force is the newton (N) and the unit of area is meters squared (m2).
(For a review of the SI system, see Chapter 1.) Thus the unit of pressure in the SI system
is newtons per meter squared (N/m2) and is called the pascal (Pa). In terms of pascals,
the standard atmosphere is
1 standard atmosphere  101,325 Pa
Checking tire pressure.

Sample Exercise 5.1
1 atm  760 mm Hg
 760 torr
 101,325 Pa
 29.92 in Hg
 14.7 lb/in2

Thus 1 atmosphere is about 105 pascals. Since the pascal is so small, and since it is not
commonly used in the United States, we will use it sparingly in this book. However,
converting from torrs or atmospheres to pascals is straightforward, as shown in Sample
Exercise 5.1.

Pressure Conversions
The pressure of a gas is measured as 49 torr. Represent this pressure in both atmospheres
and pascals.
Solution
1 atm
 6.4  102 atm
760 torr
101,325 Pa
6.4  102 atm 
 6.5  103 Pa
1 atm
49 torr 

See Exercises 5.27 and 5.28.

5.2

The Gas Laws of Boyle, Charles, and Avogadro

In this section we will consider several mathematical laws that relate the properties of
gases. These laws derive from experiments involving careful measurements of the relevant gas properties. From these experimental results, the mathematical relationships among
the properties can be discovered. These relationships are often represented pictorially by
means of graphs (plots).
We will take a historical approach to these laws to give you some perspective on the
scientiﬁc method in action.
Visualization: Boyle’s Law: A
Graphical View

Boyle’s Law
The ﬁrst quantitative experiments on gases were performed by an Irish chemist, Robert
Boyle (1627–1691). Using a J-shaped tube closed at one end (Fig. 5.4), which he reportedly set up in the multistory entryway of his house, Boyle studied the relationship between
the pressure of the trapped gas and its volume. Representative values from Boyle’s
experiments are given in Table 5.1. These data show that the product of the pressure and

182

Chapter Five

Gases
Mercury
added

Gas

Gas

TABLE 5.1
Volume
(in3)

Pressure
(in Hg)

117.5
87.2
70.7
58.8
44.2
35.3
29.1

12.0
16.0
20.0
24.0
32.0
40.0
48.0

h

h

Actual Data from Boyle’s Experiment
Pressure  Volume
(in Hg  in3)
14.1
14.0
14.1
14.1
14.1
14.1
14.0









102
102
102
102
102
102
102

volume for the trapped air sample is constant within the accuracies of Boyle’s measurements
(note the third column in Table 5.1). This behavior can be represented by the equation
PV  k

Mercury

FIGURE 5.4
A J-tube similar to the one used by Boyle.

Boyle’s law: V r 1 P at constant
temperature.

which is called Boyle’s law and where k is a constant for a given sample of air at a speciﬁc temperature.
It is convenient to represent the data in Table 5.1 by using two different plots. The ﬁrst
type of plot, P versus V, forms a curve called a hyperbola shown in Fig. 5.5(a). Looking at
this plot, note that as the volume drops by about half (from 58.8 to 29.1), the pressure doubles (from 24.0 to 48.0). In other words, there is an inverse relationship between pressure
and volume. The second type of plot can be obtained by rearranging Boyle’s law to give
V

Graphing is reviewed in Appendix 1.3.

1
k
k
P
P

which is the equation for a straight line of the type
y  mx  b
where m represents the slope and b the intercept of the straight line. In this case, y  V,
x  1P, m  k, and b  0. Thus a plot of V versus 1P using Boyle’s data gives a
straight line with an intercept of zero, as shown in Fig. 5.5(b).
In the three centuries since Boyle carried out his studies, the sophistication of measuring techniques has increased tremendously. The results of highly accurate measurements show
that Boyle’s law holds precisely only at very low pressures. Measurements at higher pressures reveal that PV is not constant but varies as the pressure is varied. Results for several
gases at pressures below 1 atm are shown in Fig. 5.6. Note the very small changes that occur
in the product PV as the pressure is changed at these low pressures. Such changes become

P (in Hg)

100

40

50

slope = k

FIGURE 5.5
Plotting Boyle’s data from Table 5.1. (a) A
plot of P versus V shows that the volume
doubles as the pressure is halved. (b) A plot
of V versus 1P gives a straight line. The
slope of this line equals the value of the
constant k.

V (in3)

P
P
2
0

20

40

V

0
2V

(a)

20

60

V (in3 )

(b)

0

0.01

0.02
0.03
1/P (in Hg)

5.2
Ideal
22.45

Ne

PV (L.atm)

22.40

O2

22.35

CO2

22.30
22.25
0

0.25

0.50 0.75
P (atm)

1.00

Sample Exercise 5.2

5.6 × 103 Pa

1.5 × 104 Pa

The Gas Laws of Boyle, Charles, and Avogadro

183

FIGURE 5.6
A plot of PV versus P for several gases at pressures below 1 atm. An ideal gas is expected to have a constant value of PV, as shown by the dotted line. Carbon dioxide shows the largest change in PV, and this
change is actually quite small: PV changes from about 22.39 L  atm at 0.25 atm to 22.26 L  atm at
1.00 atm. Thus Boyle’s law is a good approximation at these relatively low pressures.

more signiﬁcant at much higher pressures, where the complex nature of the dependence of
PV on pressure becomes more obvious. We will discuss these deviations and the reasons for
them in detail in Section 5.8. A gas that strictly obeys Boyle’s law is called an ideal gas. We
will describe the characteristics of an ideal gas more completely in Section 5.3.
One common use of Boyle’s law is to predict the new volume of a gas when the pressure is changed (at constant temperature), or vice versa. Because deviations from Boyle’s
law are so slight at pressures close to 1 atm, in our calculations we will assume that gases
obey Boyle’s law (unless stated otherwise).

Boyle’s Law I
Sulfur dioxide (SO2), a gas that plays a central role in the formation of acid rain, is found
in the exhaust of automobiles and power plants. Consider a 1.53-L sample of gaseous SO2
at a pressure of 5.6  103 Pa. If the pressure is changed to 1.5  104 Pa at a constant
temperature, what will be the new volume of the gas?
Solution
We can solve this problem using Boyle’s law,
PV  k
which also can be written as

V = 1.53 L

P1V1  k  P2V2 or P1V1  P2V2

V=?

As pressure increases, the volume of SO2
decreases.

where the subscripts 1 and 2 represent two states (conditions) of the gas (both at the same
temperature). In this case,
P1  5.6  103 Pa
V1  1.53 L

P2  1.5  104 Pa
V2  ?

We can solve the preceding equation for V2:
V2 
Boyle’s law also can be written as

The new volume will be 0.57 L.

P1V1  P2V2

Always check that your answer makes
physical (common!) sense.

Sample Exercise 5.3

P1V1
5.6  103 Pa  1.53 L

 0.57 L
P2
1.5  104 Pa

See Exercise 5.33.
The fact that the volume decreases in Sample Exercise 5.2 makes sense because the
pressure was increased. To help eliminate errors, make it a habit to check whether an answer to a problem makes physical sense.
We mentioned before that Boyle’s law is only approximately true for real gases. To
determine the signiﬁcance of the deviations, studies of the effect of changing pressure on
the volume of a gas are often done, as shown in Sample Exercise 5.3.

Boyle’s Law II
In a study to see how closely gaseous ammonia obeys Boyle’s law, several volume measurements were made at various pressures, using 1.0 mol NH3 gas at a temperature of 0C. Using
the results listed on the following page, calculate the Boyle’s law constant for NH3 at the
various pressures.

PV (L • atm)

184

Chapter Five

Gases

22.6

Experiment

Pressure (atm)

Volume (L)

22.5

1
2
3
4
5
6

0.1300
0.2500
0.3000
0.5000
0.7500
1.000

172.1
89.28
74.35
44.49
29.55
22.08

22.4
22.3
22.2

Solution

22.1

0

0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
P (atm)

FIGURE 5.7
A plot of PV versus P for 1 mol of ammonia. The dashed line shows the extrapolation of the data to zero pressure to give the
“ideal” value of PV of 22.41 L  atm.

To determine how closely NH3 gas follows Boyle’s law under these conditions, we calculate the value of k (in L  atm) for each set of values:
Experiment
k ⫽ PV

1
22.37

2
22.32

3
22.31

4
22.25

5
22.16

6
22.08

Although the deviations from true Boyle’s law behavior are quite small at these low
pressures, note that the value of k changes regularly in one direction as the pressure is
increased. Thus, to calculate the “ideal” value of k for NH3, we can plot PV versus P, as
shown in Fig. 5.7, and extrapolate (extend the line beyond the experimental points) back
to zero pressure, where, for reasons we will discuss later, a gas behaves most ideally. The
value of k obtained by this extrapolation is 22.41 L  atm. Notice that this is the same value
obtained from similar plots for the gases CO2, O2, and Ne at 0C, as shown in Fig. 5.6.
See Exercise 5.97.

Charles’s Law

Visualization: Liquid Nitrogen
and Balloons

6

He

In the century following Boyle’s ﬁndings, scientists continued to study the properties of
gases. One of these scientists was a French physicist, Jacques Charles (1746–1823), who
was the ﬁrst person to ﬁll a balloon with hydrogen gas and who made the ﬁrst solo balloon ﬂight. Charles found in 1787 that the volume of a gas at constant pressure increases
linearly with the temperature of the gas. That is, a plot of the volume of a gas (at constant pressure) versus its temperature (C) gives a straight line. This behavior is shown
for samples of several gases in Fig. 5.8. The slopes of the lines in this graph are different

5
V (L)

4

CH4

3

H2O

2

H2

1

N2O

–300 –200 –100 0 100 200 300
–273.2 °C
T (°C)

FIGURE 5.8
Plots of V versus T (C) for several gases.
The solid lines represent experimental measurements on gases. The dashed lines represent extrapolation of the data into regions
where these gases would become liquids or
solids. Note that the samples of the various
gases contain different numbers of moles.

A snowmaking machine, in which water is blown
through nozzles by compressed air. The mixture
is cooled by expansion to form ice crystals of
snow.

5.2

He

6

The Gas Laws of Boyle, Charles, and Avogadro

185

5
CH4

V (L)

4
3

H2O

2

H2

1

N2O

0

73 173 273 373 473 573
T (K)

FIGURE 5.9
Plots of V versus T as in Fig. 5.8, except here
the Kelvin scale is used for temperature.

Visualization: Charles’s Law: A
Graphical View
Charles’s law: V r T (expressed in K) of
constant pressure.

Sample Exercise 5.4

because the samples contain different numbers of moles of gas. A very interesting feature
of these plots is that the volumes of all the gases extrapolate to zero at the same temperature, 273.2C. On the Kelvin temperature scale this point is deﬁned as 0 K, which leads
to the following relationship between the Kelvin and Celsius scales:
K  °C  273
When the volumes of the gases shown in Fig. 5.8 are plotted versus temperature on the
Kelvin scale, the plots in Fig. 5.9 result. In this case, the volume of each gas is directly
proportional to temperature and extrapolates to zero when the temperature is 0 K. This
behavior is represented by the equation known as Charles’s law,
V  bT
where T is in kelvins and b is a proportionality constant.
Before we illustrate the uses of Charles’s law, let us consider the importance of 0 K.
At temperatures below this point, the extrapolated volumes would become negative. The
fact that a gas cannot have a negative volume suggests that 0 K has a special signiﬁcance.
In fact, 0 K is called absolute zero, and there is much evidence to suggest that this
temperature cannot be attained. Temperatures of approximately 0.000001 K have been
produced in laboratories, but 0 K has never been reached.

Charles’s Law
A sample of gas at 15C and 1 atm has a volume of 2.58 L. What volume will this gas
occupy at 38C and 1 atm?
Solution
Charles’s law, which describes the dependence of the volume of a gas on temperature at
constant pressure, can be used to solve this problem. Charles’s law in the form V  bT
can be rearranged to
V
b
T

Charles’s law also can be written as

An equivalent statement is

V1
V2

T1
T2

V1
V2
b
T1
T2
where the subscripts 1 and 2 represent two states for a given sample of gas at constant
pressure. In this case, we are given the following (note that the temperature values must
be changed to the Kelvin scale):
T1  15°C  273  288 K
V1  2.58 L

T2  38°C  273  311 K
V2  ?

Solving for V2 gives
V2  a

T2
311 K
bV a
b 2.58 L  2.79 L
T1 1
288 K

Reality Check: The new volume is greater than the initial volume, which makes physical
sense because the gas will expand as it is heated.
See Exercise 5.35.

Avogadro’s Law
In Chapter 2 we noted that in 1811 the Italian chemist Avogadro postulated that equal
volumes of gases at the same temperature and pressure contain the same number of

186

Chapter Five

Gases
“particles.” This observation is called Avogadro’s law, which is illustrated by Fig. 5.10.
Stated mathematically, Avogadro’s law is
V  an
where V is the volume of the gas, n is the number of moles of gas particles, and a is a
proportionality constant. This equation states that for a gas at constant temperature and
pressure, the volume is directly proportional to the number of moles of gas. This relationship is obeyed closely by gases at low pressures.

Sample Exercise 5.5
Avogadro’s law also can be written as
V1
V2

n1
n2

Avogadro’s Law
Suppose we have a 12.2-L sample containing 0.50 mol oxygen gas (O2) at a pressure of
1 atm and a temperature of 25C. If all this O2 were converted to ozone (O3) at the same
temperature and pressure, what would be the volume of the ozone?
Solution
The balanced equation for the reaction is

3O2 1g2 ¡ 2O3 1g2

To calculate the moles of O3 produced, we must use the appropriate mole ratio:
0.50 mol O2 

2 mol O3
 0.33 mol O3
3 mol O2

Avogadro’s law states that V  an, which can be rearranged to give
N2

H2

V
a
n
Since a is a constant, an alternative representation is
V1
V2
a
n1
n2
where V1 is the volume of n1 moles of O2 gas and V2 is the volume of n2 moles of O3 gas.
In this case we have

Ar

n1  0.50 mol
V1  12.2 L

CH4

n2  0.33 mol
V2  ?

Solving for V2 gives
V2  a
FIGURE 5.10
These balloons each hold 1.0 L of gas at
25C and 1 atm. Each balloon contains
0.041 mol of gas, or 2.5  1022 molecules.

n2
0.33 mol
b V1  a
b 12.2 L  8.1 L
n1
0.50 mol

Reality Check: Note that the volume decreases, as it should, since fewer moles of gas
molecules will be present after O2 is converted to O3.
See Exercises 5.35 and 5.36.

5.3

The Ideal Gas Law

We have considered three laws that describe the behavior of gases as revealed by experimental observations:
Boyle’s law:
Charles’s law:
Avogadro’s law:

V

k
P

V  bT
V  an

1at constant T and n2
1at constant P and n2
1at constant T and P2

5.3

The Ideal Gas Law

187

These relationships, which show how the volume of a gas depends on pressure, temperature, and number of moles of gas present, can be combined as follows:
V  Ra

R  0.08206

L  atm
K  mol

Tn
b
P

where R is the combined proportionality constant called the universal gas constant. When
the pressure is expressed in atmospheres and the volume in liters, R has the value
0.08206 L  atmK  mol. The preceding equation can be rearranged to the more familiar
form of the ideal gas law:
PV  nRT

Visualization: The Ideal Gas
Law, PV  nRT

The ideal gas law applies best at
pressures smaller than 1 atm.

Sample Exercise 5.6

The ideal gas law is an equation of state for a gas, where the state of the gas is its
condition at a given time. A particular state of a gas is described by its pressure, volume,
temperature, and number of moles. Knowledge of any three of these properties is enough
to completely deﬁne the state of a gas, since the fourth property can then be determined
from the equation for the ideal gas law.
It is important to recognize that the ideal gas law is an empirical equation—it is
based on experimental measurements of the properties of gases. A gas that obeys this
equation is said to behave ideally. The ideal gas equation is best regarded as a limiting law—it expresses behavior that real gases approach at low pressures and high temperatures. Therefore, an ideal gas is a hypothetical substance. However, most gases
obey the ideal gas equation closely enough at pressures below 1 atm that only minimal errors result from assuming ideal behavior. Unless you are given information to
the contrary, you should assume ideal gas behavior when solving problems involving
gases in this text.
The ideal gas law can be used to solve a variety of problems. Sample Exercise 5.6
demonstrates one type, where you are asked to ﬁnd one property characterizing the state
of a gas, given the other three.

Ideal Gas Law I
A sample of hydrogen gas (H2) has a volume of 8.56 L at a temperature of 0C and a
pressure of 1.5 atm. Calculate the moles of H2 molecules present in this gas sample.
Solution
Solving the ideal gas law for n gives
n

PV
RT

In this case P  1.5 atm, V  8.56 L, T  0C  273  273 K, and R  0.08206
L  atm/K  mol. Thus
n
The reaction of zinc with hydrochloric acid
to produce bubbles of hydrogen gas.

11.5 atm218.56 L2

a0.08206

L  atm
b1273 K2
K  mol

 0.57 mol

See Exercises 5.37 through 5.42.
The ideal gas law is also used to calculate the changes that will occur when the conditions of the gas are changed.

188

Chapter Five

Gases

Sample Exercise 5.7

Ideal Gas Law II
Suppose we have a sample of ammonia gas with a volume of 7.0 mL at a pressure of
1.68 atm. The gas is compressed to a volume of 2.7 mL at a constant temperature. Use
the ideal gas law to calculate the ﬁnal pressure.
Solution

10

10

9

9

8

The basic assumption we make when using the ideal gas law to describe a change in state
for a gas is that the equation applies equally well to both the initial and the ﬁnal states.
In dealing with a change in state, we always place the variables that change on one side
of the equals sign and the constants on the other. In this case the pressure and volume
change, and the temperature and the number of moles remain constant (as does R, by
deﬁnition). Thus we write the ideal gas law as

8

7.0 ml

7

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

PV  nRT

p
Change

2.7 ml

2

1

Since n and T remain the same in this case, we can write P1V1  nRT and P2V2  nRT.
Combining these gives

1

mL

mL

1.68
2
1

3

0

2
4

atm

5

r
Remain constant

1
0

P1V1  nRT  P2V2

3
4

atm

5

4.4

or

P1V1  P2V2

We are given P1  1.68 atm, V1  7.0 mL, and V2  2.7 mL. Solving for P2 thus gives
P2  a

As pressure increases, the volume
decreases.

V1
7.0 mL
bP  a
b 1.68 atm  4.4 atm
V2 1
2.7 mL

Reality Check: Does this answer make sense? The volume decreased (at constant
temperature), so the pressure should increase, as the result of the calculation indicates.
Note that the calculated ﬁnal pressure is 4.4 atm. Most gases do not behave ideally above
1 atm. Therefore, we might ﬁnd that if we measured the pressure of this gas sample, the
observed pressure would differ slightly from 4.4 atm.
See Exercises 5.43 and 5.44.

Sample Exercise 5.8

Ideal Gas Law III
A sample of methane gas that has a volume of 3.8 L at 5C is heated to 86C at constant
pressure. Calculate its new volume.
Solution
To solve this problem, we take the ideal gas law and segregate the changing variables and
the constants by placing them on opposite sides of the equation. In this case, volume and
temperature change, and the number of moles and pressure (and, of course, R) remain
constant. Thus PV  nRT becomes
V
nR

T
P
which leads to
V1
nR

T1
P

V2
nR

T2
P

and

Combining these gives
V1
V2
nR


T1
P
T2

or

V1
V2

T1
T2

5.3

The Ideal Gas Law

189

We are given
T1  5°C  273  278 K
V1  3.8 L
Thus
V2 

T2  86°C  273  359 K
V2  ?

1359 K213.8 L2
T2V1

 4.9 L
T1
278 K

Reality Check: Is the answer sensible? In this case the temperature increased (at constant
pressure), so the volume should increase. Thus the answer makes sense.
See Exercises 5.45 and 5.46.
The problem in Sample Exercise 5.8 could be described as a “Charles’s law problem,”
whereas the problem in Sample Exercise 5.7 might be called a “Boyle’s law problem.” In
both cases, however, we started with the ideal gas law. The real advantage of using the ideal
gas law is that it applies to virtually any problem dealing with gases and is easy to remember.
Sample Exercise 5.9

Ideal Gas Law IV
A sample of diborane gas (B2H6), a substance that bursts into ﬂame when exposed to air,
has a pressure of 345 torr at a temperature of 15C and a volume of 3.48 L. If conditions are changed so that the temperature is 36C and the pressure is 468 torr, what will
be the volume of the sample?
Solution

Visualization: Changes in Gas
Volume, Pressure, and
Concentration

Since, for this sample, pressure, temperature, and volume all change while the number of
moles remains constant, we use the ideal gas law in the form
PV
 nR
T
which leads to
P1V1
P2V2
 nR 
T1
T2

or

P1V1
P2V2

T1
T2

Then
V2 

T2P1V1
T1P2

We have
P1  345 torr
T1  15°C  273  258 K
V1  3.48 L
Thus
V2 

P2  468 torr
T2  36°C  273  309 K
V2  ?

1309 K21345 torr213.48 L2
 3.07 L
1258 K21468 torr2
See Exercises 5.47 and 5.48.

Always convert the temperature to the
Kelvin scale when applying the ideal
gas law.

Since the equation used in Sample Exercise 5.9 involves a ratio of pressures, it was
unnecessary to convert pressures to units of atmospheres. The units of torrs cancel. (You

190

Chapter Five

Gases
468
will obtain the same answer by inserting P1  345
760 and P2  760 into the equation.) However, temperature must always be converted to the Kelvin scale; since this conversion involves addition of 273, the conversion factor does not cancel. Be careful.
One of the many other types of problems dealing with gases that can be solved using the ideal gas law is illustrated in Sample Exercise 5.10.

Sample Exercise 5.10

Ideal Gas Law V
A sample containing 0.35 mol argon gas at a temperature of 13C and a pressure of
568 torr is heated to 56C and a pressure of 897 torr. Calculate the change in volume that
occurs.
Solution
We use the ideal gas law to ﬁnd the volume for each set of conditions:

State 1

State 2

n1  0.35 mol

n2  0.35 mol

P1  568 torr 

1 atm
 0.747 atm
760 torr

T1  13°C  273  286 K

P2  897 torr 

1 atm
 1.18 atm
760 torr

T2  56°C  273  329 K

Solving the ideal gas law for volume gives
V1 

10.35 mol210.08206 L  atm/K  mol21286 K2
n1RT1

 11 L
P1
10.747 atm2

V2 

10.35 mol210.08206 L  atm/K  mol21329 K2
n2RT2

 8.0 L
P2
11.18 atm2

and

Thus, in going from state 1 to state 2, the volume changes from 11 L to 8.0 L. The change
in volume, V ( is the Greek capital letter delta), is then
¢V  V2  V1  8.0 L  11 L  3 L
The change in volume is negative because the volume decreases. Note that for this problem (unlike Sample Exercise 5.9) the pressures must be converted from torrs to atmospheres, as required by the atmosphere part of the units for R, since each volume was found
separately and the conversion factor does not cancel.
See Exercise 5.49.

Argon glowing in a discharge tube.

5.4
When 273.15 K is used in this calculation, the molar volume obtained in
Sample Exercise 5.3 is the same value
as 22.41 L.

Gas Stoichiometry

Suppose we have 1 mole of an ideal gas at 0C (273.2 K) and 1 atm. From the ideal gas
law, the volume of the gas is given by
V

11.000 mol210.08206 L  atm/K  mol21273.2 K2
nRT

 22.42 L
P
1.000 atm

5.4

Gas Stoichiometry

191

TABLE 5.2 Molar Volumes for
Various Gases at 0C and 1 atm
Molar
Volume (L)

Gas
Oxygen (O2)
Nitrogen (N2)
Hydrogen (H2)
Helium (He)
Argon (Ar)
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
Ammonia (NH3)

22.397
22.402
22.433
22.434
22.397
22.260
22.079

FIGURE 5.11
22.4 L of a gas would just ﬁt into this box.

STP: 0C and 1 atm

Sample Exercise 5.11

This volume of 22.42 liters is the molar volume of an ideal gas (at 0C and 1 atm). The
measured molar volumes of several gases are listed in Table 5.2. Note that the molar
volumes of some of the gases are very close to the ideal value, while others deviate signiﬁcantly. Later in this chapter we will discuss some of the reasons for the deviations.
The conditions 0C and 1 atm, called standard temperature and pressure (abbreviated STP), are common reference conditions for the properties of gases. For example,
the molar volume of an ideal gas is 22.42 liters at STP (see Fig. 5.11).

Gas Stoichiometry I
A sample of nitrogen gas has a volume of 1.75 L at STP. How many moles of N2 are
present?
Solution
We could solve this problem by using the ideal gas equation, but we can take a shortcut
by using the molar volume of an ideal gas at STP. Since 1 mole of an ideal gas at STP
has a volume of 22.42 L, 1.75 L of N2 at STP will contain less than 1 mole. We can ﬁnd
how many moles using the ratio of 1.75 L to 22.42 L:
1.75 L N2 

1 mol N2
 7.81  102 mol N2
22.42 L N2
See Exercises 5.51 and 5.52.

Many chemical reactions involve gases. By assuming ideal behavior for these gases,
we can carry out stoichiometric calculations if the pressure, volume, and temperature of
the gases are known.
Sample Exercise 5.12

Gas Stoichiometry II
Quicklime (CaO) is produced by the thermal decomposition of calcium carbonate (CaCO3).
Calculate the volume of CO2 at STP produced from the decomposition of 152 g CaCO3
by the reaction
CaCO3 1s2 ¡ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2

192

Chapter Five

Gases
Solution
We employ the same strategy we used in the stoichiometry problems earlier in this book.
That is, we compute the number of moles of CaCO3 consumed and the number of moles
of CO2 produced. The moles of CO2 can then be converted to volume using the molar
volume of an ideal gas.
Using the molar mass of CaCO3 (100.09 g/mol), we can calculate the number of moles
of CaCO3:
152 g CaCO3 

1 mol CaCO3
 1.52 mol CaCO3
100.09 g CaCO3

Since each mole of CaCO3 produces a mole of CO2, 1.52 mol CO2 will be formed. We
can compute the volume of CO2 at STP by using the molar volume:
1.52 mol CO2 

22.42 L CO2
 34.1 L CO2
1 mol CO2

Thus the decomposition of 152 g CaCO3 produces 34.1 L CO2 at STP.
See Exercises 5.53 through 5.56.
Remember that the molar volume of an
ideal gas is 22.42 L when measured
at STP.

Sample Exercise 5.13

Note that in Sample Exercise 5.12 the ﬁnal step involved calculation of the volume
of gas from the number of moles. Since the conditions were speciﬁed as STP, we were
able to use the molar volume of a gas at STP. If the conditions of a problem are different
from STP, the ideal gas law must be used to compute the volume.

Gas Stoichiometry III
A sample of methane gas having a volume of 2.80 L at 25C and 1.65 atm was mixed
with a sample of oxygen gas having a volume of 35.0 L at 31C and 1.25 atm. The mixture was then ignited to form carbon dioxide and water. Calculate the volume of CO2
formed at a pressure of 2.50 atm and a temperature of 125C.
Solution
From the description of the reaction, the unbalanced equation is
CH4 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  H2O1g2
which can be balanced to give
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2
Next, we must ﬁnd the limiting reactant, which requires calculating the numbers of moles
of each reactant. We convert the given volumes of methane and oxygen to moles using
the ideal gas law as follows:
11.65 atm212.80 L2
PV

 0.189 mol
RT
10.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2
11.25 atm2135.0 L2
PV
nO2 

 1.75 mol
RT
10.08206 L  atm/K  mol21304 K2

nCH4 

In the balanced equation for the combustion reaction, 1 mol CH4 requires 2 mol O2. Thus
the moles of O2 required by 0.189 mol CH4 can be calculated as follows:
0.189 mol CH4 

2 mol O2
 0.378 mol O2
1 mol CH4

5.4

Gas Stoichiometry

193

Since 1.75 mol O2 is available, O2 is in excess. The limiting reactant is CH4. The number
of moles of CH4 available must be used to calculate the number of moles of CO2 produced:
0.189 mol CH4 

1 mol CO2
 0.189 mol CO2
1 mol CH4

Since the conditions stated are not STP, we must use the ideal gas law to calculate the
volume:
V

nRT
P

In this case n  0.189 mol, T  125C  273  398 K, P  2.50 atm, and R  0.08206 L 
atm/K  mol. Thus
V

10.189 mol210.08206 L  atm/K  mol21398 K2
 2.47 L
2.50 atm

This represents the volume of CO2 produced under these conditions.
See Exercises 5.57 and 5.58.

Molar Mass of a Gas
One very important use of the ideal gas law is in the calculation of the molar mass (molecular weight) of a gas from its measured density. To see the relationship between gas
density and molar mass, consider that the number of moles of gas n can be expressed as
n

grams of gas
mass
m


molar mass
molar mass
molar mass

Substitution into the ideal gas equation gives
P
Density 

mass
volume

1m molar mass2RT
m1RT2
nRT


V
V
V1molar mass2

However, mV is the gas density d in units of grams per liter. Thus
P

dRT
molar mass

or
Molar mass 

dRT
P

(5.1)

Thus, if the density of a gas at a given temperature and pressure is known, its molar mass
can be calculated.
Sample Exercise 5.14

Gas Density/Molar Mass
The density of a gas was measured at 1.50 atm and 27C and found to be 1.95 g/L.
Calculate the molar mass of the gas.
Solution
Using Equation (5.1), we calculate the molar mass as follows:
g
L  atm
a1.95 ba0.08206
b1300. K2
L
K  mol
dRT

 32.0 g/mol
Molar mass 
P
1.50 atm

194

Chapter Five

Gases
Reality Check: These are the units expected for molar mass.
See Exercises 5.61 through 5.64.

You could memorize the equation involving gas density and molar mass, but it is
better simply to remember the total gas equation, the deﬁnition of density, and the relationship between number of moles and molar mass. You can then derive the appropriate
equation when you need it. This approach ensures that you understand the concepts and
means one less equation to memorize.

5.5

Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures

Among the experiments that led John Dalton to propose the atomic theory were his studies of mixtures of gases. In 1803 Dalton summarized his observations as follows: For a
mixture of gases in a container, the total pressure exerted is the sum of the pressures that
each gas would exert if it were alone. This statement, known as Dalton’s law of partial
pressures, can be expressed as follows:
PTOTAL  P1  P2  P3  p
where the subscripts refer to the individual gases (gas 1, gas 2, and so on). The symbols
P1, P2, P3, and so on represent each partial pressure, the pressure that a particular gas
would exert if it were alone in the container.
Assuming that each gas behaves ideally, the partial pressure of each gas can be calculated from the ideal gas law:
P1 

n1RT
,
V

P2 

n2RT
,
V

P3 

n3RT
,
V

p

The total pressure of the mixture PTOTAL can be represented as
n3RT
n1RT
n2RT
PTOTAL  P1  P2  P3  p 


p
V
V
V
RT
 1n1  n2  n3  p 2a b
V
RT
 nTOTALa b
V
where nTOTAL is the sum of the numbers of moles of the various gases. Thus, for a
mixture of ideal gases, it is the total number of moles of particles that is important,
not the identity or composition of the involved gas particles. This idea is illustrated
in Fig. 5.12.

FIGURE 5.12
The partial pressure of each gas in a mixture of gases in a container depends on the
number of moles of that gas. The total
pressure is the sum of the partial pressures
and depends on the total moles of gas particles present, no matter what they are.

5.5

Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures

195

This important observation indicates some fundamental characteristics of an ideal
gas. The fact that the pressure exerted by an ideal gas is not affected by the identity
(composition) of the gas particles reveals two things about ideal gases: (1) the volume
of the individual gas particle must not be important, and (2) the forces among the
particles must not be important. If these factors were important, the pressure exerted
by the gas would depend on the nature of the individual particles. These observations
will strongly inﬂuence the model that we will eventually construct to explain ideal gas
behavior.

Sample Exercise 5.15

Dalton’s Law I
Mixtures of helium and oxygen can be used in scuba diving tanks to help prevent “the
bends.” For a particular dive, 46 L He at 25C and 1.0 atm and 12 L O2 at 25C and
1.0 atm were pumped into a tank with a volume of 5.0 L. Calculate the partial pressure
of each gas and the total pressure in the tank at 25C.
Solution
The ﬁrst step is to calculate the number of moles of each gas using the ideal gas law in
the form:
n

PV
RT

11.0 atm2146 L2
 1.9 mol
10.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2
11.0 atm2112 L2
nO2 
 0.49 mol
10.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2

nHe 

The tank containing the mixture has a volume of 5.0 L, and the temperature is 25C. We
can use these data and the ideal gas law to calculate the partial pressure of each gas:
nRT
V
11.9 mol210.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2
PHe 
 9.3 atm
5.0 L
P

PO2 

10.49 mol210.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2
 2.4 atm
5.0 L

The total pressure is the sum of the partial pressures:
PTOTAL  PHe  PO2  9.3 atm  2.4 atm  11.7 atm
See Exercises 5.65 and 5.66.
At this point we need to deﬁne the mole fraction: the ratio of the number of moles
of a given component in a mixture to the total number of moles in the mixture. The Greek
lowercase letter chi (␹) is used to symbolize the mole fraction. For example, for a given
component in a mixture, the mole fraction ␹1 is
x1 

n1
n1

nTOTAL
n1  n2  n3  p

196

Chapter Five

Gases

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Separating Gases
ssume you work for an oil company that owns a huge
natural gas reservoir containing a mixture of methane
and nitrogen gases. In fact, the gas mixture contains so much
nitrogen that it is unusable as a fuel. Your job is to separate
the nitrogen (N2) from the methane (CH4). How might you
accomplish this task? You clearly need some sort of “molecular ﬁlter” that will stop the slightly larger methane molecules (size  430 pm) and allow the nitrogen molecules
(size  410 pm) to pass through. To accomplish the separation of molecules so similar in size will require a very
precise “ﬁlter.”
The good news is that such a ﬁlter exists. Recent work
by Steven Kuznick and Valerie Bell at Engelhard Corporation in New Jersey and Michael Tsapatsis at the University
of Massachusetts has produced a “molecular sieve” in which
the pore (passage) sizes can be adjusted precisely enough to
separate N2 molecules from CH4 molecules. The material
involved is a special hydrated titanosilicate (contains H2O,
Ti, Si, O, and Sr) compound patented by Engelhard known

A

as ETS-4 (Engelhard TitanoSilicate-4). When sodium ions
are substituted for the strontium ions in ETS-4 and the new
material is carefully dehydrated, a uniform and controllable
pore-size reduction occurs (see ﬁgure). The researchers
have shown that the material can be used to separate N2
( 410 pm) from O2 ( 390 pm). They have also shown that
it is possible to reduce the nitrogen content of natural gas
from 18% to less than 5% with a 90% recovery of methane.

Dehydration

d

d

Molecular sieve framework of titanium (blue), silicon (green), and
oxygen (red) atoms contracts on heating—at room temperature (left),
d  4.27 Å; at 250C (right), d  3.94 Å.

From the ideal gas equation we know that the number of moles of a gas is directly proportional to the pressure of the gas, since
nPa

V
b
RT

That is, for each component in the mixture,
n1  P1a

V
b,
RT

n2  P2a

V
b,
RT

p

Therefore, we can represent the mole fraction in terms of pressures:
n1

P1 1V RT 2
n1

nTOTAL
P1 1V RT 2  P2 1V RT 2  P3 1V RT 2  p



n2

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
n1

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

x1 

n3

1V RT 2P1
1V RT 21P1  P2  P3  p 2

P1
P1

P1  P2  P3  p PTOTAL

In fact, the mole fraction of each component in a mixture of ideal gases is directly related
to its partial pressure:
x2 

n2
nTOTAL



P2
PTOTAL

5.5

Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures

197

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Chemistry of Air Bags
ost experts agree that air bags represent a very important advance in automobile safety. These bags, which
are stored in the auto’s steering wheel or dash, are designed
to inﬂate rapidly (within about 40 ms) in the event of a crash,
cushioning the front-seat occupants against impact. The bags
then deﬂate immediately to allow vision and movement after the crash. Air bags are activated when a severe deceleration (an impact) causes a steel ball to compress a spring
and electrically ignite a detonator cap, which, in turn, causes
sodium azide (NaN3) to decompose explosively, forming
sodium and nitrogen gas:

M

cyanide. It also forms hydrazoic acid (HN3), a toxic and
explosive liquid, when treated with acid.
The air bag represents an application of chemistry that
has already saved thousands of lives.

2NaN3 1s2 ¡ 2Na1s2  3N2 1g2
This system works very well and requires a relatively small
amount of sodium azide (100 g yields 56 L N2(g) at 25C
and 1.0 atm).
When a vehicle containing air bags reaches the end of
its useful life, the sodium azide present in the activators must
be given proper disposal. Sodium azide, besides being explosive, has a toxicity roughly equal to that of sodium

Sample Exercise 5.16

Inﬂated air bags.

Dalton’s Law II
The partial pressure of oxygen was observed to be 156 torr in air with a total atmospheric
pressure of 743 torr. Calculate the mole fraction of O2 present.
Solution
The mole fraction of O2 can be calculated from the equation
xO2 

P O2
PTOTAL



156 torr
 0.210
743 torr

Note that the mole fraction has no units.
See Exercise 5.69.
The expression for the mole fraction,
x1 

P1
PTOTAL

can be rearranged to give
P1  x1  PTOTAL
That is, the partial pressure of a particular component of a gaseous mixture is the mole
fraction of that component times the total pressure.

198

Chapter Five

Gases

KClO3(MnO2)

O2(g), H2O(g)

H2 O

FIGURE 5.13
The production of oxygen by thermal decomposition of KClO3. The MnO2 is mixed
with the KClO3 to make the reaction faster.

Sample Exercise 5.17

Dalton’s Law III
The mole fraction of nitrogen in the air is 0.7808. Calculate the partial pressure of N2 in
air when the atmospheric pressure is 760. torr.
Solution
The partial pressure of N2 can be calculated as follows:
PN2  xN2  PTOTAL  0.7808  760. torr  593 torr
See Exercise 5.70.

Collecting a Gas over Water

Vapor pressure will be discussed in detail
in Chapter 10. A table of water vapor
pressure values is given in Section 10.8.

Sample Exercise 5.18

A mixture of gases results whenever a gas is collected by displacement of water. For example, Fig. 5.13 shows the collection of oxygen gas produced by the decomposition of
solid potassium chlorate. In this situation, the gas in the bottle is a mixture of water vapor and the oxygen being collected. Water vapor is present because molecules of water
escape from the surface of the liquid and collect in the space above the liquid. Molecules
of water also return to the liquid. When the rate of escape equals the rate of return, the
number of water molecules in the vapor state remains constant, and thus the pressure of
water vapor remains constant. This pressure, which depends on temperature, is called the
vapor pressure of water.

Gas Collection over Water
A sample of solid potassium chlorate (KClO3) was heated in a test tube (see Fig. 5.13)
and decomposed by the following reaction:
2KClO3 1s2 ¡ 2KCl1s2  3O2 1g2
The oxygen produced was collected by displacement of water at 22C at a total pressure
of 754 torr. The volume of the gas collected was 0.650 L, and the vapor pressure of water at 22C is 21 torr. Calculate the partial pressure of O2 in the gas collected and the mass
of KClO3 in the sample that was decomposed.
Solution
First we ﬁnd the partial pressure of O2 from Dalton’s law of partial pressures:
PTOTAL  PO2  PH2O  PO2  21 torr  754 torr

5.6

The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases

199

Thus
PO2  754 torr  21 torr  733 torr
Now we use the ideal gas law to ﬁnd the number of moles of O2:
nO2 

PO2V
RT

In this case,
PO2  733 torr 

733 torr
 0.964 atm
760 torr/atm

V  0.650 L
T  22°C  273  295 K
R  0.08206 L  atm/K  mol
Thus
nO2 

10.964 atm210.650 L2
 2.59  102 mol
10.08206 L  atm/K  mol21295 K2

Next we will calculate the moles of KClO3 needed to produce this quantity of O2. From
the balanced equation for the decomposition of KClO3, we have a mole ratio of 2 mol
KClO33 mol O2. The moles of KClO3 can be calculated as follows:
2.59  102 mol O2 

2 mol KClO3
 1.73  102 mol KClO3
3 mol O2

Using the molar mass of KClO3 (122.6 g/mol), we calculate the grams of KClO3:
1.73  102 mol KClO3 

122.6 g KClO3
 2.12 g KClO3
1 mol KClO3

Thus the original sample contained 2.12 g KClO3.
See Exercises 5.71 through 5.73.

5.6

The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases

We have so far considered the behavior of gases from an experimental point of view. Based
on observations from different types of experiments, we know that at pressures of less
than 1 atm most gases closely approach the behavior described by the ideal gas law. Now
we want to construct a model to explain this behavior.
Before we do this, let’s brieﬂy review the scientiﬁc method. Recall that a law is a
way of generalizing behavior that has been observed in many experiments. Laws are very
useful, since they allow us to predict the behavior of similar systems. For example, if a
chemist prepares a new gaseous compound, a measurement of the gas density at known
pressure and temperature can provide a reliable value for the compound’s molar mass.
However, although laws summarize observed behavior, they do not tell us why nature
behaves in the observed fashion. This is the central question for scientists. To try to answer this question, we construct theories (build models). The models in chemistry consist
of speculations about what the individual atoms or molecules (microscopic particles) might
be doing to cause the observed behavior of the macroscopic systems (collections of very
large numbers of atoms and molecules).
A model is considered successful if it explains the observed behavior in question and
predicts correctly the results of future experiments. It is important to understand that a
model can never be proved absolutely true. In fact, any model is an approximation by its

200

Chapter Five

Gases

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 5.14
(a) One mole of N2(l) has a volume of approximately 35 mL and a density of 0.81 g/mL. (b) One mole of N2(g) has a volume of 22.4 L (STP)
and a density of 1.2  103 g/mL. Thus the ratio of the volumes of gaseous N2 and liquid N2 is 22.40.035  640 and the spacing of the
molecules is 9 times farther apart in N2(g).

very nature and is bound to fail at some point. Models range from the simple to the extraordinarily complex. We use simple models to predict approximate behavior and more
complicated models to account very precisely for observed quantitative behavior. In this
text we will stress simple models that provide an approximate picture of what might be
happening and that ﬁt the most important experimental results.
An example of this type of model is the kinetic molecular theory (KMT), a simple
model that attempts to explain the properties of an ideal gas. This model is based on speculations about the behavior of the individual gas particles (atoms or molecules). The postulates of the kinetic molecular theory as they relate to the particles of an ideal gas can
be stated as follows:
1. The particles are so small compared with the distances between them that the volume
of the individual particles can be assumed to be negligible (zero). See Fig. 5.14.
Visualization: Visualizing
Molecular Motion: Single
Molecule

2. The particles are in constant motion. The collisions of the particles with the walls of
the container are the cause of the pressure exerted by the gas.
3. The particles are assumed to exert no forces on each other; they are assumed neither
to attract nor to repel each other.

Visualization: Visualizing
Molecular Motion: Many
Molecules

Visualization: Boyle’s Law: A
Molecular-Level View

4. The average kinetic energy of a collection of gas particles is assumed to be directly
proportional to the Kelvin temperature of the gas.
Of course, the molecules in a real gas have ﬁnite volumes and do exert forces on each
other. Thus real gases do not conform to these assumptions. However, we will see that
these postulates do indeed explain ideal gas behavior.
The true test of a model is how well its predictions ﬁt the experimental observations.
The postulates of the kinetic molecular model picture an ideal gas as consisting of particles having no volume and no attractions for each other, and the model assumes that the
gas produces pressure on its container by collisions with the walls.
Let’s consider how this model accounts for the properties of gases as summarized by
the ideal gas law: PV  nRT.

Pressure and Volume (Boyle’s Law)
We have seen that for a given sample of gas at a given temperature (n and T are constant)
that if the volume of a gas is decreased, the pressure increases:
P  1nRT2

1
V

h
Constant

5.6

The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases

201

Volume is
decreased

FIGURE 5.15
The effects of decreasing the volume of a
sample of gas at constant temperature.

This makes sense based on the kinetic molecular theory, since a decrease in volume means
that the gas particles will hit the wall more often, thus increasing pressure, as illustrated
in Fig. 5.15.

Pressure and Temperature
From the ideal gas law we can predict that for a given sample of an ideal gas at a constant volume, the pressure will be directly proportional to the temperature:
Pa

nR
bT
V

h
Constant

The KMT accounts for this behavior because when the temperature of a gas increases,
the speeds of its particles increase, the particles hitting the wall with greater force and
greater frequency. Since the volume remains the same, this would result in increased gas
pressure, as illustrated in Fig. 5.16.

Volume and Temperature (Charles’s Law)
The ideal gas law indicates that for a given sample of gas at a constant pressure, the volume of the gas is directly proportional to the temperature in kelvins:
Va

nR
bT
P

h
Constant

Visualization: Charles’s Law: A
Molecular-Level View

This can be visualized from the KMT, as shown in Fig. 5.17. When the gas is heated to
a higher temperature, the speeds of its molecules increase and thus they hit the walls
more often and with more force. The only way to keep the pressure constant in this
situation is to increase the volume of the container. This compensates for the increased
particle speeds.

Temperature
is increased

FIGURE 5.16
The effects of increasing the temperature of
a sample of gas at constant volume.

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

202

Chapter Five

Gases

Temperature
is increased

FIGURE 5.17
The effects of increasing the temperature of
a sample of gas at constant pressure.

Volume and Number of Moles (Avogadro’s Law)
The ideal gas law predicts that the volume of a gas at a constant temperature and pressure
depends directly on the number of gas particles present:
Va

RT
bn
P

h
Constant

This makes sense in terms of the KMT, because an increase in the number of gas particles
at the same temperature would cause the pressure to increase if the volume were held
constant (see Fig. 5.18). The only way to return the pressure to its original value is to
increase the volume.
It is important to recognize that the volume of a gas (at constant P and T) depends
only on the number of gas particles present. The individual volumes of the particles are
not a factor because the particle volumes are so small compared with the distances between
the particles (for a gas behaving ideally).

Mixture of Gases (Dalton’s Law)
The observation that the total pressure exerted by a mixture of gases is the sum of the
pressures of the individual gases is expected because the KMT assumes that all gas particles are independent of each other and that the volumes of the individual particles are
unimportant. Thus the identities of the gas particles do not matter.

Deriving the Ideal Gas Law
We have shown qualitatively that the assumptions of the KMT successfully account for
the observed behavior of an ideal gas. We can go further. By applying the principles of
physics to the assumptions of the KMT, we can in effect derive the ideal gas law.

Moles of gas
increases

FIGURE 5.18
The effects of increasing the number of
moles of gas particles at constant temperature and pressure.

Gas cylinder

Increase volume
to return to
original pressure

5.6

The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases

203

As shown in detail in Appendix 2, we can apply the deﬁnitions of velocity, momentum, force, and pressure to the collection of particles in an ideal gas and derive the following expression for pressure:
P

1
2 nNA 1 2mu2 2
c
d
3
V

where P is the pressure of the gas, n is the number of moles of gas, NA is Avogadro’s
number, m is the mass of each particle, u2 is the average of the square of the velocities of
the particles, and V is the volume of the container.
The quantity 12mu2 represents the average kinetic energy of a gas particle. If the average
kinetic energy of an individual particle is multiplied by NA, the number of particles in a
mole, we get the average kinetic energy for a mole of gas particles:
1KE2 avg  NA 1 12mu2 2

Kinetic energy (KE) given by the equation
KE  12mu 2 is the energy due to the
motion of a particle. We will discuss this
further in Section 6.1.

Using this deﬁnition, we can rewrite the expression for pressure as
P

2 n1KE2 avg
c
d
3
V

or

2
PV
 1KE2 avg
n
3

The fourth postulate of the kinetic molecular theory is that the average kinetic energy
of the particles in the gas sample is directly proportional to the temperature in Kelvins.
Thus, since (KE)avg r T, we can write
Visualization: Liquid Nitrogen
and Balloons

PV
2
 1KE2 avg r T
n
3

or

PV
r T
n

Note that this expression has been derived from the assumptions of the kinetic molecular
theory. How does it compare to the ideal gas law—the equation obtained from experiment? Compare the ideal gas law,
PV
 RT
n

From experiment

with the result from the kinetic molecular theory,
PV
r T
n

From theory

(a) A balloon ﬁlled with air at room temperature. (b) The balloon is dipped into liquid nitrogen at 77 K.
(c) The balloon collapses as the molecules inside slow down due to the decreased temperature. Slower
molecules produce a lower pressure.

204

Chapter Five

Gases
These expressions have exactly the same form if R, the universal gas constant, is considered
the proportionality constant in the second case.
The agreement between the ideal gas law and the predictions of the kinetic molecular
theory gives us conﬁdence in the validity of the model. The characteristics we have
assumed for ideal gas particles must agree, at least under certain conditions, with their
actual behavior.

The Meaning of Temperature
We have seen from the kinetic molecular theory that the Kelvin temperature indicates the
average kinetic energy of the gas particles. The exact relationship between temperature
and average kinetic energy can be obtained by combining the equations:
PV
2
 RT  1KE2 avg
n
3
which yields the expression
3
1KE2 avg  RT
2
This is a very important relationship. It summarizes the meaning of the Kelvin temperature of a gas: The Kelvin temperature is an index of the random motions of the particles
of a gas, with higher temperature meaning greater motion. (As we will see in Chapter 10,
temperature is an index of the random motions in solids and liquids as well as in gases.)

Root Mean Square Velocity
In the equation from the kinetic molecular theory, the average velocity of the gas particles is a special kind of average. The symbol u2 means the average of the squares of the
particle velocities. The square root of u2 is called the root mean square velocity and is
symbolized by urms:
urms  2u2
We can obtain an expression for urms from the equations
1KE2 avg  NA 1 12mu2 2

3
and 1KE2 avg  RT
2

Combination of these equations gives
3
NA 1 12mu2 2  RT or
2

u2 

3RT
N Am

Taking the square root of both sides of the last equation produces
2u2  urms 

3RT
B NAm

In this expression m represents the mass in kilograms of a single gas particle. When NA,
the number of particles in a mole, is multiplied by m, the product is the mass of a mole
of gas particles in kilograms. We will call this quantity M. Substituting M for NAm in the
equation for urms, we obtain
urms 

3RT
B M

Before we can use this equation, we need to consider the units for R. So far we have
used 0.08206 L  atm/K  mol as the value of R. But to obtain the desired units (meters

5.6
L  atm
K  mol
J
R  8.3145
K  mol

R  0.08206

Sample Exercise 5.19

The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases

205

per second) for urms, R must be expressed in different units. As we will see in more detail in Chapter 6, the energy unit most often used in the SI system is the joule (J). A joule
is deﬁned as a kilogram meter squared per second squared (kg  m2/s2). When R is converted to include the unit of joules, it has the value 8.3145 J/K  mol. When R in these
units is used in the expression 13RT M , urms is obtained in the units of meters per second
as desired.

Root Mean Square Velocity
Calculate the root mean square velocity for the atoms in a sample of helium gas at 25C.
Solution
The formula for root mean square velocity is
urms 

Visualization: Kinetic-Molecular
Theory/Heat Transfer

3RT
B M

In this case T  25C  273  298 K, R  8.3145 J/K  mol, and M is the mass of a
mole of helium in kilograms:
M  4.00

g
1 kg

 4.00  103 kg/mol
mol
1000 g

Thus
J
b1298 K2
K  mol
J
 1.86  106
kg
B
kg
4.00  103
mol

3a8.3145
urms 
b

Since the units of J are kg  m2/s2, this expression becomes
B

Relative number of O2 molecules
with given velocity

FIGURE 5.19
Path of one particle in a gas. Any given particle will continuously change its course as
a result of collisions with other particles, as
well as with the walls of the container.

0

4 × 102 8 × 102
Molecular velocity (m/s)

FIGURE 5.20
A plot of the relative number of O2 molecules that have a given velocity at STP.

1.86  106

kg  m2
 1.36  103 m/s
kg  s2

Note that the resulting units (m/s) are appropriate for velocity.
See Exercises 5.79 and 5.80.
So far we have said nothing about the range of velocities actually found in a gas sample. In a real gas there are large numbers of collisions between particles. For example, as
we will see in the next section, when an odorous gas such as ammonia is released in a
room, it takes some time for the odor to permeate the air. This delay results from collisions between the NH3 molecules and the O2 and N2 molecules in the air, which greatly
slow the mixing process.
If the path of a particular gas particle could be monitored, it would look very erratic,
something like that shown in Fig. 5.19. The average distance a particle travels between
collisions in a particular gas sample is called the mean free path. It is typically a very
small distance (1  107 m for O2 at STP). One effect of the many collisions among gas
particles is to produce a large range of velocities as the particles collide and exchange kinetic energy. Although urms for oxygen gas at STP is approximately 500 meters per second, the majority of O2 molecules do not have this velocity. The actual distribution of
molecular velocities for oxygen gas at STP is shown in Fig. 5.20. This ﬁgure shows the
relative number of gas molecules having each particular velocity.
We are also interested in the effect of temperature on the velocity distribution in a gas.
Figure 5.21 shows the velocity distribution for nitrogen gas at three temperatures. Note that
as the temperature is increased, the curve peak moves toward higher values and the range

206

Chapter Five

Gases
of velocities becomes much larger. The peak of the curve reﬂects the most probable velocity
(the velocity found most often as we sample the movement of the various particles in the
gas). Because the kinetic energy increases with temperature, it makes sense that the peak
of the curve should move to higher values as the temperature of the gas is increased.

Relative number of N2 molecules
with given velocity

273 K

5.7
1273 K

2273 K

0

1000
2000
Velocity (m/s)

3000

FIGURE 5.21
A plot of the relative number of N2 molecules
that have a given velocity at three temperatures. Note that as the temperature increases,
both the average velocity and the spread of
velocities increase.

Visualization: Effusion of a Gas

In Graham’s law the units for molar mass
can be g/mol or kg/mol, since the units
cancel in the ratio 1M2 1M1.

Sample Exercise 5.20

Effusion and Diffusion

We have seen that the postulates of the kinetic molecular theory, when combined with the
appropriate physical principles, produce an equation that successfully ﬁts the experimentally observed behavior of gases as they approach ideal behavior. Two phenomena
involving gases provide further tests of this model.
Diffusion is the term used to describe the mixing of gases. When a small amount of
pungent-smelling ammonia is released at the front of a classroom, it takes some time before everyone in the room can smell it, because time is required for the ammonia to mix
with the air. The rate of diffusion is the rate of the mixing of gases. Effusion is the term
used to describe the passage of a gas through a tiny oriﬁce into an evacuated chamber, as
shown in Fig. 5.22. The rate of effusion measures the speed at which the gas is transferred
into the chamber.

Effusion
Thomas Graham (1805–1869), a Scottish chemist, found experimentally that the rate of
effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of the mass of its particles.
Stated in another way, the relative rates of effusion of two gases at the same temperature
and pressure are given by the inverse ratio of the square roots of the masses of the gas
particles:
Rate of effusion for gas 1
1M2

Rate of effusion for gas 2
1M1
where M1 and M2 represent the molar masses of the gases. This equation is called
Graham’s law of effusion.

Effusion Rates
Calculate the ratio of the effusion rates of hydrogen gas (H2) and uranium hexaﬂuoride (UF6),
a gas used in the enrichment process to produce fuel for nuclear reactors (see Fig. 5.23).

Pinhole

FIGURE 5.22
The effusion of a gas into an evacuated
chamber. The rate of effusion (the rate
at which the gas is transferred across the
barrier through the pin hole) is inversely
proportional to the square root of the
mass of the gas molecules.

Gas

Vacuum

Percentage of molecules

5.7

207

Solution

0.04
0.03

First we need to compute the molar masses: Molar mass of H2  2.016 g/mol, and molar
mass of UF6  352.02 g/mol. Using Graham’s law,

UF6 at 273 K

0.02

1MUF6
Rate of effusion for H2
352.02


 13.2
Rate of effusion for UF6
B 2.016
1MH2

0.01
H2 at 273 K
0

Effusion and Diffusion

3000

The effusion rate of the very light H2 molecules is about 13 times that of the massive UF6
molecules.

FIGURE 5.23
Relative molecular speed distribution of H2
and UF6.

See Exercises 5.85 through 5.88.

0

1000

2000
Speed

Does the kinetic molecular model for gases correctly predict the relative effusion
rates of gases summarized by Graham’s law? To answer this question, we must recognize
that the effusion rate for a gas depends directly on the average velocity of its particles.
The faster the gas particles are moving, the more likely they are to pass through the effusion oriﬁce. This reasoning leads to the following prediction for two gases at the same
pressure and temperature (T):
Effusion rate for gas 1
urms for gas 1


Effusion rate for gas 2
urms for gas 2

3RT
B M1
3RT
B M2



1M2
1M1

This equation is identical to Graham’s law. Thus the kinetic molecular model does ﬁt the
experimental results for the effusion of gases.

Diffusion
Visualization: Diffusion of
Gases

Diffusion is frequently illustrated by the lecture demonstration represented in Fig. 5.24,
in which two cotton plugs soaked in ammonia and hydrochloric acid are simultaneously
placed at the ends of a long tube. A white ring of ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) forms
where the NH3 and HCl molecules meet several minutes later:
NH3 1g2  HCl1g2 ¡ NH4Cl1s2

White solid

Visualization: Gaseous Ammonia and Hydrochloric Acid
Cotton wet
with NH3(aq)

Glass tube

Air

Cotton wet
with HCl(aq)

Air

HCl

NH3
d NH3

d HCl
White ring of NH4Cl(s)
forms where the NH3
and HCl meet

FIGURE 5.24
(above right) When HCl(g) and NH3(g) meet in the tube, a white ring of NH4Cl(s) forms. (above left) A
demonstration of the relative diffusion rates of NH3 and HCl molecules through air. Two cotton plugs,
one dipped in HCl(aq) and one dipped in NH3(aq), are simultaneously inserted into the ends of the tube.
Gaseous NH3 and HCl vaporizing from the cotton plugs diffuse toward each other and, where they meet,
react to form NH4Cl(s).

208

Chapter Five

Gases
As a ﬁrst approximation we might expect that the distances traveled by the two gases are
related to the relative velocities of the gas molecules:
Distance traveled by NH3
urms for NH3
MHCl
36.5



 1.5
Distance traveled by HCl
urms for HCl
B MNH3 B 17
However, careful experiments produce an observed ratio of less than 1.5, indicating that
a quantitative analysis of diffusion requires a more complex analysis.
The diffusion of the gases through the tube is surprisingly slow in light of the fact that
the velocities of HCl and NH3 molecules at 25C are about 450 and 660 meters per second, respectively. Why does it take several minutes for the NH3 and HCl molecules to meet?
The answer is that the tube contains air and thus the NH3 and HCl molecules undergo many
collisions with O2 and N2 molecules as they travel through the tube. Because so many
collisions occur when gases mix, diffusion is quite complicated to describe theoretically.

5.8
CH4

N2

2.0

H2
PV
nRT

CO2
Ideal
gas

1.0

0
0

200 400 600 800 1000
P (atm)

FIGURE 5.25
Plots of PVnRT versus P for several gases
(200 K). Note the signiﬁcant deviations
from ideal behavior (PVnRT  1). The
behavior is close to ideal only at low
pressures (less than 1 atm).

203 K
1.8

PV
nRT

293 K

1.4
673 K
1.0
0.6

Ideal
gas
0

200

400 600
P (atm)

800

FIGURE 5.26
Plots of PVnRT versus P for nitrogen gas
at three temperatures. Note that although
nonideal behavior is evident in each case,
the deviations are smaller at the higher
temperatures.

Real Gases

An ideal gas is a hypothetical concept. No gas exactly follows the ideal gas law, although
many gases come very close at low pressures and/or high temperatures. Thus ideal gas behavior
can best be thought of as the behavior approached by real gases under certain conditions.
We have seen that a very simple model, the kinetic molecular theory, by making some
rather drastic assumptions (no interparticle interactions and zero volume for the gas particles), successfully explains ideal behavior. However, it is important that we examine real
gas behavior to see how it differs from that predicted by the ideal gas law and to determine what modiﬁcations are needed in the kinetic molecular theory to explain the observed behavior. Since a model is an approximation and will inevitably fail, we must be
ready to learn from such failures. In fact, we often learn more about nature from the
failures of our models than from their successes.
We will examine the experimentally observed behavior of real gases by measuring
the pressure, volume, temperature, and number of moles for a gas and noting how the
quantity PVnRT depends on pressure. Plots of PVnRT versus P are shown for several
gases in Fig. 5.25. For an ideal gas, PVnRT equals 1 under all conditions, but notice that
for real gases, PVnRT approaches 1 only at very low pressures (typically below 1 atm).
To illustrate the effect of temperature, PVnRT is plotted versus P for nitrogen gas at
several temperatures in Fig. 5.26. Note that the behavior of the gas appears to become
more nearly ideal as the temperature is increased. The most important conclusion to be
drawn from these ﬁgures is that a real gas typically exhibits behavior that is closest to
ideal behavior at low pressures and high temperatures.
One of the most important procedures in science is correcting our models as we collect more data. We will understand more clearly how gases actually behave if we can ﬁgure out how to correct the simple model that explains the ideal gas law so that the new
model ﬁts the behavior we actually observe for gases. So the question is: How can we
modify the assumptions of the kinetic molecular theory to ﬁt the behavior of real gases?
The ﬁrst person to do important work in this area was Johannes van der Waals (1837–1923),
a physics professor at the University of Amsterdam who in 1910 received a Nobel Prize
for his work. To follow his analysis, we start with the ideal gas law,
P

nRT
V

Remember that this equation describes the behavior of a hypothetical gas consisting of
volumeless entities that do not interact with each other. In contrast, a real gas consists
of atoms or molecules that have ﬁnite volumes. Therefore, the volume available to a
given particle in a real gas is less than the volume of the container because the gas particles themselves take up some of the space. To account for this discrepancy, van der Waals

5.8

Real Gases

209

represented the actual volume as the volume of the container V minus a correction factor
for the volume of the molecules nb, where n is the number of moles of gas and b is an
empirical constant (one determined by ﬁtting the equation to the experimental results). Thus
the volume actually available to a given gas molecule is given by the difference V  nb.
This modiﬁcation of the ideal gas equation leads to the equation
P is corrected for the ﬁnite volume of
the particles. The attractive forces have
not yet been taken into account.

P¿ 

nRT
V  nb

The volume of the gas particles has now been taken into account.
The next step is to allow for the attractions that occur among the particles in a real
gas. The effect of these attractions is to make the observed pressure Pobs smaller than it
would be if the gas particles did not interact:
Pobs  1P¿  correction factor2  a

where a is a proportionality constant (which includes the factor of 12 from N 22). The value
of a for a given real gas can be determined from observing the actual behavior of that
gas. Inserting the corrections for both the volume of the particles and the attractions of
the particles gives the equation

We have now corrected for both the ﬁnite
volume and the attractive forces of the
particles.

Observed
pressure

nRT
n 2
 aa b
V  nb
V

Volume
of the
container

⎧
⎨
⎩

{

Pobs 
88
88
n

FIGURE 5.27
(a) Gas at low concentration—relatively few
interactions between particles. The indicated gas particle exerts a pressure on the
wall close to that predicted for an ideal gas.
(b) Gas at high concentration—many more
interactions between particles. The indicated gas particle exerts a much lower pressure on the wall than would be expected in
the absence of interactions.

n 2
Pobs  P¿  a a b
V

8n

Wall
(b)

8n

Wall
(a)

This effect can be understood using the following model. When gas particles come close
together, attractive forces occur, which cause the particles to hit the wall very slightly less
often than they would in the absence of these interactions (see Fig. 5.27).
The size of the correction factor depends on the concentration of gas molecules deﬁned
in terms of moles of gas particles per liter (nV). The higher the concentration, the more
likely a pair of gas particles will be close enough to attract each other. For large numbers
of particles, the number of interacting pairs of particles depends on the square of the number of particles and thus on the square of the concentration, or (nV)2. This can be justiﬁed as follows: In a gas sample containing N particles, there are N  1 partners available
for each particle, as shown in Fig. 5.28. Since the 1 p 2 pair is the same as the 2 p 1
pair, this analysis counts each pair twice. Thus, for N particles, there are N(N  1)2 pairs.
If N is a very large number, N  1 approximately equals N, giving N 22 possible pairs.
Thus the pressure, corrected for the attractions of the particles, has the form

Volume
correction

88n

The attractive forces among molecules
will be discussed in Chapter 10.

nRT
 correction factorb
V  nb

Pressure
correction

Given particle
1

2

3
4

7
6

5

8

10
9

Gas sample with ten particles

FIGURE 5.28
Illustration of pairwise interactions among gas particles. In a sample
with 10 particles, each particle has 9 possible partners, to give
1
10(9)2  45 distinct pairs. The factor of 2 arises because when
p
pair, and
particle 1 is the particle of interest we count the
p
is the particle of interest we count the
when particle
p
p
pair. However,
and
are the same pair that we
have counted twice. Therefore, we must divide by 2 to get the actual
number of pairs.

➁
➀

➀

➁

➁

➀

➁
➁

➀

210

Chapter Five

Gases

FIGURE 5.29
The volume taken up by the gas particles
themselves is less important at (a) large
container volume (low pressure) than at
(b) small container volume (high pressure).

(a)

(b)

This equation can be rearranged to give the van der Waals equation:
n 2
c Pobs  a a b d  1V  nb2  nRT
V

TABLE 5.3 Values of the van
der Waals Constants for Some
Common Gases
Gas
He
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe
H2
N2
O2
Cl2
CO2
CH4
NH3
H2O

aa

atm  L2
b
mol2
0.0341
0.211
1.35
2.32
4.19
0.244
1.39
1.36
6.49
3.59
2.25
4.17
5.46

ba

L
b
mol

0.0237
0.0171
0.0322
0.0398
0.0511
0.0266
0.0391
0.0318
0.0562
0.0427
0.0428
0.0371
0.0305

Corrected pressure

Corrected volume

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

Pobs is usually called just P.

Pideal

Videal

The values of the weighting factors a and b are determined for a given gas by ﬁtting
experimental behavior. That is, a and b are varied until the best ﬁt of the observed pressure is obtained under all conditions. The values of a and b for various gases are given in
Table 5.3.
Experimental studies indicate that the changes van der Waals made in the basic assumptions of the kinetic molecular theory correct the major ﬂaws in the model. First, consider the effects of volume. For a gas at low pressure (large volume), the volume of the
container is very large compared with the volumes of the gas particles. That is, in this
case the volume available to the gas is essentially equal to the volume of the container,
and the gas behaves ideally. On the other hand, for a gas at high pressure (small container
volume), the volume of the particles becomes signiﬁcant so that the volume available to
the gas is signiﬁcantly less than the container volume. These cases are illustrated in
Fig. 5.29. Note from Table 5.3 that the volume correction constant b generally increases
with the size of the gas molecule, which gives further support to these arguments.
The fact that a real gas tends to behave more ideally at high temperatures also can
be explained in terms of the van der Waals model. At high temperatures the particles are
moving so rapidly that the effects of interparticle interactions are not very important.
The corrections to the kinetic molecular theory that van der Waals found necessary
to explain real gas behavior make physical sense, which makes us conﬁdent that we understand the fundamentals of gas behavior at the particle level. This is signiﬁcant because
so much important chemistry takes place in the gas phase. In fact, the mixture of gases
called the atmosphere is vital to our existence. In Section 5.10 we consider some of the
important reactions that occur in the atmosphere.

5.9

Characteristics of Several Real Gases

We can understand gas behavior more completely if we examine the characteristics of several common gases. Note from Figure 5.25 that the gases H2, N2, CH4, and CO2 show difPV
ferent behavior when the compressibility (nRT
) is plotted versus P. For example, notice
that the plot for H2(g) never drops below the ideal value (1.0) in contrast to all the other
gases. What is special about H2 compared to these other gases? Recall from Section 5.8
that the reason that the compressibility of a real gas falls below 1.0 is that the actual (observed) pressure is lower than the pressure expected for an ideal gas due to the intermolecular attractions that occur in real gases. This must mean that H2 molecules have very
low attractive forces for each other. This idea is borne out by looking at the van der Waals

5.10

Chemistry in the Atmosphere

211

a value for H2 in Table 5.3. Note that H2 has the lowest value among the gases H2, N2,
CH4, and CO2. Remember that the value of a reﬂects how much of a correction must be
made to adjust the observed pressure up to the expected ideal pressure:
n 2
Pideal  Pobserved  a a b
V
A low value for a reﬂects weak intermolecular forces among the gas molecules.
Also notice that although the compressibility for N2 dips below 1.0, it does not show
as much deviation as that for CH4, which in turn does not show as much deviation as the
compressibility for CO2. Based on this behavior we can surmise that the importance of
intermolecular interactions increases in this order:
H2 6 N2 6 CH4 6 CO2
TABLE 5.4 Atmospheric
Composition Near Sea Level
(Dry Air)*
Component

Mole Fraction

N2
O2
Ar
CO2
Ne
He
CH4
Kr
H2
NO
Xe

0.78084
0.20948
0.00934
0.000345
0.00001818
0.00000524
0.00000168
0.00000114
0.0000005
0.0000005
0.000000087

*The atmosphere contains various amounts
of water vapor depending on conditions.

10 –13

1000
500

10

–8

200

20

10 –1

10

Altitude (km)

50

Troposphere

Pressure (atm)

100
10 –3

5
2
1
1
–100

0
–50

0

50

100

Temperature (°C)

FIGURE 5.30
The variation of temperature (blue) and
pressure (dashed lines) with altitude. Note
that the pressure steadily decreases with altitude, but the temperature increases and
decreases.

This order is reﬂected by the relative a values for these gases in Table 5.3. In Section 10.1,
we will see how these variations in intermolecular interactions can be explained. The main
point to be made here is that real gas behavior can tell us about the relative importance
of intermolecular attractions among gas molecules.

5.10

Chemistry in the Atmosphere

The most important gases to us are those in the atmosphere that surrounds the earth’s
surface. The principal components are N2 and O2, but many other important gases, such
as H2O and CO2, are also present. The average composition of the earth’s atmosphere near
sea level, with the water vapor removed, is shown in Table 5.4. Because of gravitational
effects, the composition of the earth’s atmosphere is not constant; heavier molecules tend
to be near the earth’s surface, and light molecules tend to migrate to higher altitudes, with
some eventually escaping into space. The atmosphere is a highly complex and dynamic
system, but for convenience we divide it into several layers based on the way the temperature changes with altitude. (The lowest layer, called the troposphere, is shown in
Fig. 5.30.) Note that in contrast to the complex temperature proﬁle of the atmosphere, the
pressure decreases in a regular way with increasing altitude.
The chemistry occurring in the higher levels of the atmosphere is mostly determined
by the effects of high-energy radiation and particles from the sun and other sources
in space. In fact, the upper atmosphere serves as an important shield to prevent this highenergy radiation from reaching the earth, where it would damage the relatively fragile
molecules sustaining life. In particular, the ozone in the upper atmosphere helps prevent
high-energy ultraviolet radiation from penetrating to the earth. Intensive research is in
progress to determine the natural factors that control the ozone concentration and how it
is affected by chemicals released into the atmosphere.
The chemistry occurring in the troposphere, the layer of atmosphere closest to the
earth’s surface, is strongly inﬂuenced by human activities. Millions of tons of gases and
particulates are released into the troposphere by our highly industrial civilization. Actually, it is amazing that the atmosphere can absorb so much material with relatively small
permanent changes (so far).
Signiﬁcant changes, however, are occurring. Severe air pollution is found around
many large cities, and it is probable that long-range changes in our planet’s weather are
taking place. We will discuss some of the long-range effects of pollution in Chapter 6. In
this section we will deal with short-term, localized effects of pollution.
The two main sources of pollution are transportation and the production of electricity. The combustion of petroleum in vehicles produces CO, CO2, NO, and NO2, along
with unburned molecules from petroleum. When this mixture is trapped close to the ground
in stagnant air, reactions occur producing chemicals that are potentially irritating and
harmful to living systems.

212

Chapter Five

Gases

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Acid Rain: A Growing Problem
ainwater, even in pristine wilderness areas, is slightly
acidic because some of the carbon dioxide present in the
atmosphere dissolves in the raindrops to produce H ions
by the following reaction:

R

H2O1l2  CO2 1g2 ¡ H 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2
This process produces only very small concentrations of
H ions in the rainwater. However, gases such as NO2 and
SO2, which are by-products of energy use, can produce signiﬁcantly higher H concentrations. Nitrogen dioxide reacts with water to give a mixture of nitrous acid and nitric
acid:
2NO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ HNO2 1aq2  HNO3 1aq2
Sulfur dioxide is oxidized to sulfur trioxide, which then reacts with water to form sulfuric acid:
2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2SO3 1g2
SO3 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2SO4 1aq2
The damage caused by the acid formed in polluted air is
a growing worldwide problem. Lakes are dying in Norway,

0.4

Other
pollutants

0.3
NO2

0.2

Radiant
energy

NO2 1g2 —¡ NO1g2  O1g2

O3

NO

6:00

4:00

2:00

Noon

10:00

8:00

0

6:00

0.1
4:00

Concentration (ppm)

The complex chemistry of polluted air appears to center around the nitrogen oxides
(NOx). At the high temperatures found in the gasoline and diesel engines of cars and trucks,
N2 and O2 react to form a small quantity of NO that is emitted into the air with the exhaust
gases (see Fig. 5.31). This NO is immediately oxidized in air to NO2, which, in turn,
absorbs energy from sunlight and breaks up into nitric oxide and free oxygen atoms:

Molecules of unburned
fuel (petroleum)

0.5

the forests are under stress in Germany, and buildings and
statues are deteriorating all over the world.
The Field Museum in Chicago contains more white
Georgia marble than any other structure in the world. But
nearly 70 years of exposure to the elements has taken such
a toll on it that the building has recently undergone a
multimillion-dollar renovation to replace the damaged marble
with freshly quarried material.
What is the chemistry of the deterioration of marble
by sulfuric acid? Marble is produced by geologic
processes at high temperatures and pressures from limestone, a sedimentary rock formed by slow deposition of
calcium carbonate from the shells of marine organisms.
Limestone and marble are chemically identical (CaCO3)
but differ in physical properties; limestone is composed
of smaller particles of calcium carbonate and is thus more
porous and more workable. Although both limestone and
marble are used for buildings, marble can be polished
to a higher sheen and is often preferred for decorative
purposes.
Both marble and limestone react with sulfuric acid to
form calcium sulfate. The process can be represented most

Time of day

FIGURE 5.31
Concentration (in molecules per million
molecules of “air”) for some smog components versus time of day.
(From “Photochemistry of Air Pollution,” by P. A.
Leighton, in Physical Chemistry: A Series of Monographs, edited by Eric Hutchinson and P. Van
Rysselberghe, copyright 1961 and renewed 1989,
Elsevier Science (USA), reproduced by permission
of the publisher.)

The OH radical has no charge [it has one
fewer electron than the hydroxide ion
(OH)].

Oxygen atoms are very reactive and can combine with O2 to form ozone:
O1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ O3 1g2

Ozone is also very reactive and can react directly with other pollutants, or the ozone can
absorb light and break up to form an energetically excited O2 molecule (O2*) and an energetically excited oxygen atom (O*). The latter species readily reacts with a water molecule to form two hydroxyl radicals (OH):
O*  H2O ¡ 2OH
The hydroxyl radical is a very reactive oxidizing agent. For example, OH can react with
NO2 to form nitric acid:
OH  NO2 ¡ HNO3
The OH radical also can react with the unburned hydrocarbons in the polluted air to produce
chemicals that cause the eyes to water and burn and are harmful to the respiratory system.

5.10

Chemistry in the Atmosphere

213

simply as
CaCO3 1s2  H2SO4 1aq2 ¡
Ca21aq2  SO421aq2  H2O1l 2  CO2 1g2
In this equation the calcium sulfate is represented by separate hydrated ions because calcium sulfate is quite water soluble and dissolves in rainwater. Thus, in areas bathed by
rainwater, the marble slowly dissolves away.
In areas of the building protected from the rain, the calcium sulfate can form the mineral gypsum (CaSO4 2H2O).
The 2H2O in the formula of gypsum indicates the presence
of two water molecules (called waters of hydration) for each
CaSO4 formula unit in the solid. The smooth surface of the
marble is thus replaced by a thin layer of gypsum, a more
porous material that binds soot and dust.
What can be done to protect limestone and marble structures from this kind of damage? Of course, one approach is
to lower sulfur dioxide emissions from power plants (see
Fig. 5.33). In addition, scientists are experimenting with
coatings to protect marble from the acidic atmosphere. However, a coating can do more harm than good unless it
“breathes.” If moisture trapped beneath the coating freezes,
the expanding ice can fracture the marble. Needless to say,
it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a coating that will allow water, but not
acid, to pass—but the search continues.

The damaging effects of acid rain can be seen by comparing
these photos of a decorative statue on the Field Museum in
Chicago. The ﬁrst photo was taken about 1920, the second
in 1990.

The end product of this whole process is often referred to as photochemical smog,
so called because light is required to initiate some of the reactions. The production of photochemical smog can be understood more clearly by examining as a group the reactions
discussed above:
NO2 1g2 ¡ NO1g2  O1g2
O1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ O3 1g2
NO1g2  12O2 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2

Although represented here as O2, the actual oxidant for NO is OH or an organic
peroxide such as CH3COO, formed by
oxidation of organic pollutants.

Net reaction:

3
2 O2 1g2

¡ O3 1g2

Note that the NO2 molecules assist in the formation of ozone without being themselves
used up. The ozone formed then leads to the formation of OH and other pollutants.
We can observe this process by analyzing polluted air at various times during a day
(see Fig. 5.31). As people drive to work between 6 and 8 a.m., the amounts of NO, NO2,
and unburned molecules from petroleum increase. Later, as the decomposition of NO2 occurs, the concentration of ozone and other pollutants builds up. Current efforts to combat
the formation of photochemical smog are focused on cutting down the amounts of molecules from unburned fuel in automobile exhaust and designing engines that produce less
nitric oxide.
The other major source of pollution results from burning coal to produce electricity.
Much of the coal found in the Midwest contains signiﬁcant quantities of sulfur, which,
when burned, produces sulfur dioxide:
S 1in coal2  O2 1g2 ¡ SO2 1g2

214

Chapter Five

Gases
A further oxidation reaction occurs when sulfur dioxide is changed to sulfur trioxide in the air:*
2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2SO3 1g2
The production of sulfur trioxide is signiﬁcant because it can combine with droplets of
water in the air to form sulfuric acid:
SO3 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2SO4 1aq2

FIGURE 5.32
An environmental ofﬁcer in Wales tests the
pH of water.

Sulfuric acid is very corrosive to both living things and building materials. Another
result of this type of pollution is acid rain. In many parts of the northeastern United States
and southeastern Canada, acid rain has caused some freshwater lakes to become too acidic
to support any life (Fig. 5.32).
The problem of sulfur dioxide pollution is made more complicated by the energy crisis. As petroleum supplies dwindle and the price increases, our dependence on coal will
probably grow. As supplies of low-sulfur coal are used up, high-sulfur coal will be utilized. One way to use high-sulfur coal without further harming the air quality is to remove the sulfur dioxide from the exhaust gas by means of a system called a scrubber
before it is emitted from the power plant stack. A common method of scrubbing is to blow
powdered limestone (CaCO3) into the combustion chamber, where it is decomposed to
lime and carbon dioxide:
CaCO3 1s2 ¡ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2
The lime then combines with the sulfur dioxide to form calcium sulﬁte:
CaO1s2  SO2 1g2 ¡ CaSO3 1s2
To remove the calcium sulﬁte and any remaining unreacted sulfur dioxide, an aqueous
suspension of lime is injected into the exhaust gases to produce a slurry (a thick suspension), as shown in Fig. 5.33.
Unfortunately, there are many problems associated with scrubbing. The systems are
complicated and expensive and consume a great deal of energy. The large quantities of
calcium sulﬁte produced in the process present a disposal problem. With a typical scrubber, approximately 1 ton of calcium sulﬁte per year is produced per person served by the
power plant. Since no use has yet been found for this calcium sulﬁte, it is usually buried
in a landﬁll. As a result of these difﬁculties, air pollution by sulfur dioxide continues to
be a major problem, one that is expensive in terms of damage to the environment and human health as well as in monetary terms.

Water + CaO
CO2 + CaO
CaCO3
S + O2

SO2

Coal
CaSO3 +

Air

Scrubber

unreacted SO2

FIGURE 5.33
A schematic diagram of the process for
scrubbing sulfur dioxide from stack gases in
power plants.

To
smokestack
Combustion chamber
CaSO3 slurry

*This reaction is very slow unless solid particles are present. See Chapter 12 for a discussion.

For Review

Key Terms

For Review

Section 5.1
barometer
manometer
mm Hg
torr
standard atmosphere
pascal

State of a gas
䊉 The state of a gas can be described completely by specifying its pressure (P), volume
(V ), temperature (T) and the amount (moles) of gas present (n)
䊉 Pressure
• Common units

Section 5.2

1 torr  1 mm Hg
1 atm  760 torr

Boyle’s law
ideal gas
Charles’s law
absolute zero
Avogadro’s law

Section 5.3
universal gas constant
ideal gas law

Section 5.4
molar volume
standard temperature and pressure (STP)

Section 5.5
Dalton’s law of partial pressures
partial pressure
mole fraction

Section 5.6
kinetic molecular theory (KMT)
root mean square velocity
joule

Section 5.7
diffusion
effusion
Graham’s law of effusion

Section 5.8
real gas
van der Waals equation

Section 5.10
atmosphere
air pollution
photochemical smog
acid rain

215

• SI unit: pascal
1 atm  101,325 Pa
Gas laws
䊉 Discovered by observing the properties of gases
䊉 Boyle’s law: PV  k
䊉 Charles’s law: V  bT
䊉 Avogadro’s law: V  an
䊉 Ideal gas law: PV  nRT
䊉 Dalton’s law of partial pressures: Ptotal  P1  P2  P3  p , where Pn represents
the partial pressure of component n in a mixture of gases
Kinetic molecular theory (KMT)
Model that accounts for ideal gas behavior
䊉 Postulates of the KMT:
• Volume of gas particles is zero
• No particle interactions
• Particles are in constant motion, colliding with the container walls to produce
pressure
• The average kinetic energy of the gas particles is directly proportional to the
temperature of the gas in kelvins
䊉

Gas properties
䊉 The particles in any gas sample have a range of velocities
䊉 The root mean square (rms) velocity for a gas represents the average of the squares
of the particle velocities
urms 
䊉
䊉

3RT
B M

Diffusion: the mixing of two or more gases
Effusion: the process in which a gas passes through a small hole into an empty chamber

Real gas behavior
䊉 Real gases behave ideally only at high temperatures and low pressures
䊉 Understanding how the ideal gas equation must be modiﬁed to account for real gas
behavior helps us understand how gases behave on a molecular level
䊉 Van der Waals found that to describe real gas behavior we must consider particle
interactions and particle volumes

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain how a barometer and a manometer work to measure the pressure of the
atmosphere or the pressure of a gas in a container.

Chapter Five

Gases

2. What are Boyle’s law, Charles’s law, and Avogadro’s law? What plots do you
make to show a linear relationship for each law?
3. Show how Boyle’s law, Charles’s law, and Avogadro’s law are special cases of
the ideal gas law. Using the ideal gas law, determine the relationship between
P and n (at constant V and T ) and between P and T (at constant V and n).
4. Rationalize the following observations.
a. Aerosol cans will explode if heated.
b. You can drink through a soda straw.
c. A thin-walled can will collapse when the air inside is removed by a vacuum
pump.
d. Manufacturers produce different types of tennis balls for high and low
elevations.
5. Consider the following balanced equation in which gas X forms gas X2:
2X1g2 S X2 1g2

Equal moles of X are placed in two separate containers. One container is rigid
so the volume cannot change; the other container is ﬂexible so the volume
changes to keep the internal pressure equal to the external pressure. The above
reaction is run in each container. What happens to the pressure and density of
the gas inside each container as reactants are converted to products?
6. Use the postulates of the kinetic molecular theory (KMT) to explain why
Boyle’s law, Charles’s law, Avogadro’s law, and Dalton’s law of partial
pressures hold true for ideal gases. Use the KMT to explain the P versus n (at
constant V and T) relationship and the P versus T (at constant V and n)
relationship.
7. Consider the following velocity distribution curves A and B.
Relative number of molecules

216

A

B

Velocity (m/s)

a. If the plots represent the velocity distribution of 1.0 L of He(g) at STP versus 1.0 L of Cl2(g) at STP, which plot corresponds to each gas? Explain your
reasoning.
b. If the plots represent the velocity distribution of 1.0 L of O2(g) at temperatures of 273 K versus 1273 K, which plot corresponds to each temperature?
Explain your reasoning. Under which temperature condition would the O2(g)
sample behave most ideally? Explain.
8. Brieﬂy describe two methods one might use to ﬁnd the molar mass of a newly
synthesized gas for which a molecular formula was not known.
9. In the van der Waals equation, why is a term added to the observed pressure
and why is a term subtracted from the container volume to correct for nonideal
gas behavior?
10. Why do real gases not always behave ideally? Under what conditions does a
real gas behave most ideally? Why?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the learning
that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical concepts.

4. As you increase the temperature of a gas in a sealed, rigid container, what happens to the density of the gas? Would the results
be the same if you did the same experiment in a container with
a piston at constant pressure? (See Figure 5.17.)
5. A diagram in a chemistry book shows a magniﬁed view of a
ﬂask of air as follows:

1. Consider the following apparatus: a test tube covered with a nonpermeable elastic membrane inside a container that is closed with
a cork. A syringe goes through the cork.

Syringe

Cork

Membrane

a. As you push down on the syringe, how does the membrane
covering the test tube change?
b. You stop pushing the syringe but continue to hold it down.
In a few seconds, what happens to the membrane?
2. Figure 5.2 shows a picture of a barometer. Which of the following
statements is the best explanation of how this barometer works?
a. Air pressure outside the tube causes the mercury to move in the
tube until the air pressure inside and outside the tube is equal.
b. Air pressure inside the tube causes the mercury to move in the
tube until the air pressure inside and outside the tube is equal.
c. Air pressure outside the tube counterbalances the weight of
the mercury in the tube.
d. Capillary action of the mercury causes the mercury to go up
the tube.
e. The vacuum that is formed at the top of the tube holds up the
mercury.
Justify your choice, and for the choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them. Pictures help!
3. The barometer below shows the level of mercury at a given atmospheric pressure. Fill all the other barometers with mercury
for that same atmospheric pressure. Explain your answer.

Hg(l )

6.

7.

8.

9.

What do you suppose is between the dots (the dots represent air
molecules)?
a. air
b. dust
c. pollutants
d. oxygen
e. nothing
If you put a drinking straw in water, place your ﬁnger over the
opening, and lift the straw out of the water, some water stays in
the straw. Explain.
A chemistry student relates the following story: I noticed my
tires were a bit low and went to the gas station. As I was ﬁlling
the tires, I thought about the kinetic molecular theory (KMT). I
noticed the tires because the volume was low, and I realized that
I was increasing both the pressure and volume of the tires.
“Hmmm,” I thought, “that goes against what I learned in chemistry, where I was told pressure and volume are inversely proportional.” What is the fault in the logic of the chemistry student
in this situation? Explain why we think pressure and volume to
be inversely related (draw pictures and use the KMT).
Chemicals X and Y (both gases) react to form the gas XY, but it
takes a bit of time for the reaction to occur. Both X and Y are
placed in a container with a piston (free to move), and you note
the volume. As the reaction occurs, what happens to the volume
of the container? (See Fig. 5.18.)
Which statement best explains why a hot-air balloon rises when
the air in the balloon is heated?
a. According to Charles’s law, the temperature of a gas is
directly related to its volume. Thus the volume of the balloon
increases, making the density smaller. This lifts the balloon.
b. Hot air rises inside the balloon, and this lifts the balloon.
c. The temperature of a gas is directly related to its pressure.
The pressure therefore increases, and this lifts the balloon.
d. Some of the gas escapes from the bottom of the balloon, thus
decreasing the mass of gas in the balloon. This decreases the
density of the gas in the balloon, which lifts the balloon.
e. Temperature is related to the root mean square velocity of the
gas molecules. Thus the molecules are moving faster, hitting
the balloon more, and thus lifting the balloon.
Justify your choice, and for the choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them.

217

218

Chapter Five

Gases

10. Draw a highly magniﬁed view of a sealed, rigid container ﬁlled
with a gas. Then draw what it would look like if you cooled the
gas signiﬁcantly but kept the temperature above the boiling point
of the substance in the container. Also draw what it would look
like if you heated the gas signiﬁcantly. Finally, draw what each
situation would look like if you evacuated enough of the gas to
decrease the pressure by a factor of 2.
11. If you release a helium balloon, it soars upward and eventually
pops. Explain this behavior.
12. If you have any two gases in different containers that are the
same size at the same pressure and same temperature, what is
true about the moles of each gas? Why is this true?
13. Explain the following seeming contradiction: You have two
gases, A and B, in two separate containers of equal volume and
at equal pressure and temperature. Therefore, you must have the
same number of moles of each gas. Because the two temperatures are equal, the average kinetic energies of the two samples
are equal. Therefore, since the energy given such a system will
be converted to translational motion (that is, move the molecules), the root mean square velocities of the two are equal, and
thus the particles in each sample move, on average, with the same
relative speed. Since A and B are different gases, they each must
have a different molar mass. If A has higher molar mass than B,
the particles of A must be hitting the sides of the container with
more force. Thus the pressure in the container of gas A must be
higher than that in the container with gas B. However, one of
our initial assumptions was that the pressures were equal.
14. You have a balloon covering the mouth of a ﬂask ﬁlled with air
at 1 atm. You apply heat to the bottom of the ﬂask until the volume of the balloon is equal to that of the ﬂask.
a. Which has more air in it, the balloon or the ﬂask? Or do both
have the same amount? Explain.
b. In which is the pressure greater, the balloon or the ﬂask? Or
is the pressure the same? Explain.
15. How does Dalton’s law of partial pressures help us with our
model of ideal gases? That is, what postulates of the kinetic molecular theory does it support?

19. Boyle’s law can be represented graphically in several ways.
Which of the following plots does not correctly represent Boyle’s
law (assuming constant T and n)? Explain.

PV

P

V

P

P

V

1/P

1/V

20. As weather balloons rise from the earth’s surface, the pressure of
the atmosphere becomes less, tending to cause the volume of the
balloons to expand. However, the temperature is much lower in
the upper atmosphere than at sea level. Would this temperature
effect tend to make such a balloon expand or contract? Weather
balloons do, in fact, expand as they rise. What does this tell you?
21. Which noble gas has the smallest density at STP? Explain.
22. Consider two different containers, each ﬁlled with 2 moles of
Ne(g). One of the containers is rigid and has constant volume.
The other container is ﬂexible (like a balloon) and is capable of
changing its volume to keep the external pressure and internal
pressure equal to each other. If you raise the temperature in both
containers, what happens to the pressure and density of the gas
inside each container? Assume a constant external pressure.
23. Do all the molecules in a 1-mol sample of CH4(g) have the same
kinetic energy at 273 K? Do all molecules in a 1-mol sample of
N2(g) have the same velocity at 546 K? Explain.
24. Consider the following samples of gases at the same temperature.
Ne
Ar

i

ii

iii

iv

v

vi

vii

viii

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of the book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
16. At room temperature, water is a liquid with a molar volume of
18 mL. At 105C and 1 atm pressure, water is a gas and has a
molar volume of over 30 L. Explain the large difference in molar
volumes.
17. If a barometer were built using water (d  1.0 g/cm3) instead of
mercury (d  13.6 g/cm3), would the column of water be higher
than, lower than, or the same as the column of mercury at
1.00 atm? If the level is different, by what factor? Explain.
18. A bag of potato chips is packed and sealed in Los Angeles,
California, and then shipped to Lake Tahoe, Nevada, during ski
season. It is noticed that the volume of the bag of potato chips
has increased upon its arrival in Lake Tahoe. What external
conditions would most likely cause the volume increase?

Arrange each of these samples in order from lowest to highest:
a. pressure
b. average kinetic energy
c. density
d. root mean square velocity
Note: Some samples of gases may have equal values for these
attributes. Assume the larger containers have a volume twice the
volume of the smaller containers and assume the mass of an argon atom is twice the mass of a neon atom.
25. As NH3(g) is decomposed into nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas at
constant pressure and temperature, the volume of the product gases
collected is twice the volume of NH3 reacted. Explain. As NH3(g)

Exercises
is decomposed into nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas at constant
volume and temperature, the total pressure increases by some
factor. Why the increase in pressure and by what factor does the
total pressure increase when reactants are completely converted
into products? How do the partial pressures of the product gases
compare to each other and to the initial pressure of NH3?
26. Which of the following statements is (are) true? For the false
statements, correct them.
a. At constant temperature, the lighter the gas molecules, the
faster the average velocity of the gas molecules.
b. At constant temperature, the heavier the gas molecules, the
larger the average kinetic energy of the gas molecules.
c. A real gas behaves most ideally when the container volume
is relatively large and the gas molecules are moving relatively
quickly.
d. As temperature increases, the effect of interparticle interactions on gas behavior is increased.
e. At constant V and T, as gas molecules are added into a container, the number of collisions per unit area increases resulting in a higher pressure.
f. The kinetic molecular theory predicts that pressure is inversely
proportional to temperature at constant volume and mol of gas.

Exercises

30. If the sealed-tube manometer in Exercise 29 had a height difference of 20.0 inches between the mercury levels, what is the
pressure in the ﬂask in torr and atmospheres?
31. A diagram for an open-tube manometer is shown below.
Atmosphere

If the ﬂask is open to the atmosphere, the mercury levels are
equal. For each of the following situations where a gas is contained in the ﬂask, calculate the pressure in the ﬂask in torr, atmospheres, and pascals.
Atmosphere
(760. torr)

In this section similar exercises are paired.

219

Atmosphere
(760. torr)

Pressure

29. A sealed-tube manometer (as shown below) can be used to measure pressures below atmospheric pressure. The tube above the
mercury is evacuated. When there is a vacuum in the ﬂask, the
mercury levels in both arms of the U-tube are equal. If a gaseous
sample is introduced into the ﬂask, the mercury levels are different. The difference h is a measure of the pressure of the gas
inside the ﬂask. If h is equal to 6.5 cm, calculate the pressure in
the ﬂask in torr, pascals, and atmospheres.

Flask

a.

215 mm

Flask
118 mm

27. Freon-12 (CF2Cl2) is commonly used as the refrigerant in central home air conditioners. The system is initially charged to a
pressure of 4.8 atm. Express this pressure in each of the following units (1 atm  14.7 psi).
a. mm Hg
b. torr
c. Pa
d. psi
28. A gauge on a compressed gas cylinder reads 2200 psi (pounds
per square inch; 1 atm  14.7 psi). Express this pressure in each
of the following units.
a. standard atmospheres
b. megapascals (MPa)
c. torr

b.

c. Calculate the pressures in the ﬂask in parts a and b (in torr)
if the atmospheric pressure is 635 torr.
32. a. If the open-tube manometer in Exercise 31 contains a nonvolatile silicone oil (density  1.30 g/cm3) instead of mercury
(density  13.6 g/cm3), what are the pressures in the ﬂask as
shown in parts a and b in torr, atmospheres, and pascals?
b. What advantage would there be in using a less dense ﬂuid
than mercury in a manometer used to measure relatively small
differences in pressure?

Gas Laws

h
Gas

33. A particular balloon is designed by its manufacturer to be inﬂated to a volume of no more than 2.5 L. If the balloon is ﬁlled
with 2.0 L of helium at sea level, is released, and rises to an altitude at which the atmospheric pressure is only 500. mm Hg,
will the balloon burst? (Assume temperature is constant.)
34. A balloon is ﬁlled to a volume of 7.00  102 mL at a temperature of 20.0C. The balloon is then cooled at constant pressure
to a temperature of 1.00  102 K. What is the ﬁnal volume of
the balloon?

220

Chapter Five

Gases

35. An 11.2-L sample of gas is determined to contain 0.50 mol of
N2. At the same temperature and pressure, how many moles of
gas would there be in a 20.-L sample?
36. Consider the following chemical equation.
2NO2 1g2 ¡ N2O4 1g2
If 25.0 mL of NO2 gas is completely converted to N2O4 gas under the same conditions, what volume will the N2O4 occupy?
37. Complete the following table for an ideal gas.

P(atm)
a.

5.00

b.

0.300

c.

4.47

V(L)

T

2.00

155C

2.00
25.0

d.

n(mol)

2.25

155 K
2.01
10.5

75C

38. Complete the following table for an ideal gas.

P
a.

7.74  103 Pa

b.

V

455 torr

d.

745 mm Hg

T

12.2 mL
43.0 mL

c.

n

25C
0.421 mol
2

4.4  10
11.2 L

223 K
mol

331C

0.401 mol

39. Suppose two 200.0-L tanks are to be ﬁlled separately with the
gases helium and hydrogen. What mass of each gas is needed to
produce a pressure of 135 atm in its respective tank at 24C?
40. A ﬂask that can withstand an internal pressure of 2500 torr, but
no more, is ﬁlled with a gas at 21.0C and 758 torr and heated.
At what temperature will it burst?
41. A 2.50-L container is ﬁlled with 175 g argon.
a. If the pressure is 10.0 atm, what is the temperature?
b. If the temperature is 225 K, what is the pressure?
42. A person accidentally swallows a drop of liquid oxygen, O2(l),
which has a density of 1.149 g/mL. Assuming the drop has a
volume of 0.050 mL, what volume of gas will be produced in
the person’s stomach at body temperature (37C) and a pressure
of 1.0 atm?
43. A gas sample containing 1.50 mol at 25C exerts a pressure of
400. torr. Some gas is added to the same container and the temperature is increased to 50.C. If the pressure increases to 800.
torr, how many moles of gas were added to the container? Assume a constant-volume container.
44. A bicycle tire is ﬁlled with air to a pressure of 100. psi at a
temperature of 19C. Riding the bike on asphalt on a hot day

increases the temperature of the tire to 58C. The volume of the
tire increases by 4.0%. What is the new pressure in the bicycle
tire?
45. Consider two separate gas containers at the following conditions:
Container A

Container B

Contents: SO2(g)
Pressure  PA
Moles of gas  1.0 mol
Volume  1.0 L
Temperature  7C

Contents: unknown gas
Pressure  PB
Moles of gas  2.0 mol
Volume  2.0 L
Temperature  287C

How is the pressure in container B related to the pressure in container A?
46. A container is ﬁlled with an ideal gas to a pressure of 40.0 atm
at 0C.
a. What will be the pressure in the container if it is heated to
45C?
b. At what temperature would the pressure be 1.50  102 atm?
c. At what temperature would the pressure be 25.0 atm?
47. An ideal gas is contained in a cylinder with a volume of 5.0 
102 mL at a temperature of 30.C and a pressure of 710. torr.
The gas is then compressed to a volume of 25 mL, and the
temperature is raised to 820.C. What is the new pressure of
the gas?
48. A compressed gas cylinder contains 1.00  103 g of argon gas.
The pressure inside the cylinder is 2050. psi (pounds per square
inch) at a temperature of 18C. How much gas remains in the
cylinder if the pressure is decreased to 650. psi at a temperature
of 26C?
49. A sealed balloon is ﬁlled with 1.00 L of helium at 23C and
1.00 atm. The balloon rises to a point in the atmosphere where
the pressure is 220. torr and the temperature is 31C. What
is the change in volume of the balloon as it ascends from 1.00 atm
to a pressure of 220. torr?
50. A hot-air balloon is ﬁlled with air to a volume of 4.00  103 m3
at 745 torr and 21C. The air in the balloon is then heated to
62C, causing the balloon to expand to a volume of 4.20  103 m3.
What is the ratio of the number of moles of air in the heated balloon to the original number of moles of air in the balloon? (Hint:
Openings in the balloon allow air to ﬂow in and out. Thus the
pressure in the balloon is always the same as that of the
atmosphere.)

Gas Density, Molar Mass, and Reaction Stoichiometry
51. Consider the following reaction:
4Al1s2  3O2 1g2 S 2Al2O3 1s2
It takes 2.00 L of pure oxygen gas at STP to react completely
with a certain sample of aluminum. What is the mass of aluminum reacted?

Exercises
52. A student adds 4.00 g of dry ice (solid CO2) to an empty balloon. What will be the volume of the balloon at STP after all the
dry ice sublimes (converts to gaseous CO2)?
53. Air bags are activated when a severe impact causes a steel ball
to compress a spring and electrically ignite a detonator cap. This
causes sodium azide (NaN3) to decompose explosively according to the following reaction:
2NaN3 1s2 ¡ 2Na1s2  3N2 1g2
What mass of NaN3(s) must be reacted to inﬂate an air bag to
70.0 L at STP?
54. Concentrated hydrogen peroxide solutions are explosively
decomposed by traces of transition metal ions (such as Mn
or Fe):
2H2O2 1aq2 S 2H2O1l2  O2 1g2
What volume of pure O2(g), collected at 27C and 746 torr, would
be generated by decomposition of 125 g of a 50.0% by mass
hydrogen peroxide solution? Ignore any water vapor that may be
present.
55. In 1897 the Swedish explorer Andreé tried to reach the North
Pole in a balloon. The balloon was ﬁlled with hydrogen gas. The
hydrogen gas was prepared from iron splints and diluted sulfuric
acid. The reaction is
Fe1s2  H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ FeSO4 1aq2  H2 1g2
The volume of the balloon was 4800 m3 and the loss of
hydrogen gas during ﬁlling was estimated at 20.%. What mass
of iron splints and 98% (by mass) H2SO4 were needed to
ensure the complete ﬁlling of the balloon? Assume a temperature of 0C, a pressure of 1.0 atm during ﬁlling, and
100% yield.
56. Sulfur trioxide, SO3, is produced in enormous quantities each
year for use in the synthesis of sulfuric acid.
S1s2  O2 1g2 S SO2 1g2

2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 S 2SO3 1g2
What volume of O2(g) at 350.C and a pressure of 5.25 atm is
needed to completely convert 5.00 g of sulfur to sulfur trioxide?
57. Consider the reaction between 50.0 mL of liquid methyl alcohol, CH3OH (density  0.850 g/mL), and 22.8 L of O2 at 27C
and a pressure of 2.00 atm. The products of the reaction are
CO2(g) and H2O(g). Calculate the number of moles of H2O
formed if the reaction goes to completion.

59. Hydrogen cyanide is prepared commercially by the reaction of
methane, CH4(g), ammonia, NH3(g), and oxygen, O2(g), at high
temperature. The other product is gaseous water.
a. Write a chemical equation for the reaction.
b. What volume of HCN(g) can be obtained from 20.0 L CH4(g),
20.0 L NH3(g), and 20.0 L O2(g)? The volumes of all gases
are measured at the same temperature and pressure.
60. Methanol, CH3OH, can be produced by the following reaction:
CO1g2  2H2 1g2 ¡ CH3OH1g2
Hydrogen at STP ﬂows into a reactor at a rate of 16.0 L/min.
Carbon monoxide at STP ﬂows into the reactor at a rate of
25.0 L/min. If 5.30 g of methanol is produced per minute, what
is the percent yield of the reaction?
61. An unknown diatomic gas has a density of 3.164 g/L at STP.
What is the identity of the gas?
62. A compound has the empirical formula CHCl. A 256-mL ﬂask,
at 373 K and 750. torr, contains 0.800 g of the gaseous compound. Give the molecular formula.
63. Uranium hexaﬂuoride is a solid at room temperature, but it boils
at 56C. Determine the density of uranium hexaﬂuoride at 60.C
and 745 torr.
64. Given that a sample of air is made up of nitrogen, oxygen,
and argon in the mole fractions 78% N2, 21% O2, and 1.0%
Ar, what is the density of air at standard temperature and
pressure?

Partial Pressure
65. A piece of solid carbon dioxide, with a mass of 7.8 g, is placed
in a 4.0-L otherwise empty container at 27C. What is the pressure in the container after all the carbon dioxide vaporizes? If
7.8 g solid carbon dioxide were placed in the same container but
it already contained air at 740 torr, what would be the partial
pressure of carbon dioxide and the total pressure in the container
after the carbon dioxide vaporizes?
66. A mixture of 1.00 g H2 and 1.00 g He is placed in a 1.00-L container at 27C. Calculate the partial pressure of each gas and the
total pressure.
67. Consider the ﬂasks in the following diagram. What are the ﬁnal
partial pressures of H2 and N2 after the stopcock between the
two ﬂasks is opened? (Assume the ﬁnal volume is 3.00 L.) What
is the total pressure (in torr)?

58. Urea (H2NCONH2) is used extensively as a nitrogen source in
fertilizers. It is produced commercially from the reaction of ammonia and carbon dioxide:
2NH3 1g2  CO2 1g2 —
¡ H2NCONH2 1s2  H2O1g2
Pressure
Heat

Ammonia gas at 223C and 90. atm ﬂows into a reactor at a rate
of 500. L/min. Carbon dioxide at 223C and 45 atm ﬂows into
the reactor at a rate of 600. L/min. What mass of urea is produced per minute by this reaction assuming 100% yield?

221

2.00 L H2
475 torr

1.00 L N2
0.200 atm

222

Chapter Five

Gases

68. Consider the ﬂask apparatus in Exercise 67, which now contains
2.00 L of H2 at a pressure of 360. torr and 1.00 L of N2 at an
unknown pressure. If the total pressure in the ﬂasks is 320. torr
after the stopcock is opened, determine the initial pressure of N2
in the 1.00-L ﬂask.
69. The partial pressure of CH4(g) is 0.175 atm and that of O2(g) is
0.250 atm in a mixture of the two gases.
a. What is the mole fraction of each gas in the mixture?
b. If the mixture occupies a volume of 10.5 L at 65C, calculate the total number of moles of gas in the mixture.
c. Calculate the number of grams of each gas in the mixture.
70. A 1.00-L gas sample at 100.C and 600. torr contains 50.0% helium and 50.0% xenon by mass. What are the partial pressures
of the individual gases?
71. Small quantities of hydrogen gas can be prepared in the
laboratory by the addition of aqueous hydrochloric acid to
metallic zinc.
Zn1s2  2HCl1aq2 S ZnCl2 1aq2  H2 1g2
Typically, the hydrogen gas is bubbled through water for collection and becomes saturated with water vapor. Suppose 240.
mL of hydrogen gas is collected at 30.C and has a total pressure of 1.032 atm by this process. What is the partial pressure
of hydrogen gas in the sample? How many grams of zinc must
have reacted to produce this quantity of hydrogen? (The vapor
pressure of water is 32 torr at 30C.)
72. Helium is collected over water at 25C and 1.00 atm total pressure. What total volume of gas must be collected to obtain 0.586 g
of helium? (At 25C the vapor pressure of water is 23.8 torr.)
73. At elevated temperatures, sodium chlorate decomposes to
produce sodium chloride and oxygen gas. A 0.8765-g sample of
impure sodium chlorate was heated until the production of oxygen gas ceased. The oxygen gas collected over water occupied
57.2 mL at a temperature of 22C and a pressure of 734 torr.
Calculate the mass percent of NaClO3 in the original sample.
(At 22C the vapor pressure of water is 19.8 torr.)
74. Xenon and ﬂuorine will react to form binary compounds when
a mixture of these two gases is heated to 400C in a nickel
reaction vessel. A 100.0-mL nickel container is ﬁlled with xenon
and ﬂuorine, giving partial pressures of 1.24 atm and 10.10 atm,
respectively, at a temperature of 25C. The reaction vessel is
heated to 400C to cause a reaction to occur and then cooled to
a temperature at which F2 is a gas and the xenon ﬂuoride
compound produced is a nonvolatile solid. The remaining F2 gas
is transferred to another 100.0-mL nickel container, where the
pressure of F2 at 25C is 7.62 atm. Assuming all of the xenon
has reacted, what is the formula of the product?
75. Hydrogen azide, HN3, decomposes on heating by the following
unbalanced reaction:
HN3 1g2 ¡ N2 1g2  H2 1g2
If 3.0 atm of pure HN3(g) is decomposed initially, what is the
ﬁnal total pressure in the reaction container? What are the partial pressures of nitrogen and hydrogen gas? Assume the volume
and temperature of the reaction container are constant.

76. Some very effective rocket fuels are composed of lightweight
liquids. The fuel composed of dimethylhydrazine [(CH3)2N2H2]
mixed with dinitrogen tetroxide was used to power the Lunar
Lander in its missions to the moon. The two components react
according to the following equation:
1CH3 2 2N2H2 1l2  2N2O4 1l2 ¡ 3N2 1g2  4H2O1g2  2CO2 1g2
If 150 g of dimethylhydrazine reacts with excess dinitrogen
tetroxide and the product gases are collected at 27C in an evacuated 250-L tank, what is the partial pressure of nitrogen gas
produced and what is the total pressure in the tank assuming the
reaction has 100% yield?

Kinetic Molecular Theory and Real Gases
77. Calculate the average kinetic energies of CH4 and N2 molecules
at 273 K and 546 K.
78. A 100.-L ﬂask contains a mixture of methane, CH4, and argon
at 25C. The mass of argon present is 228 g and the mole fraction of methane in the mixture is 0.650. Calculate the total kinetic
energy of the gaseous mixture.
79. Calculate the root mean square velocities of CH4 and N2 molecules at 273 K and 546 K.
80. Consider separate 1.0-L samples of He(g) and UF6(g), both at
1.00 atm and containing the same number of moles. What ratio
of temperatures for the two samples would produce the same
root mean square velocity?
81. Consider a 1.0-L container of neon gas at STP. Will the average kinetic energy, average velocity, and frequency of collisions of gas molecules with the walls of the container increase,
decrease, or remain the same under each of the following
conditions?
a. The temperature is increased to 100C.
b. The temperature is decreased to 50C.
c. The volume is decreased to 0.5 L.
d. The number of moles of neon is doubled.
82. Consider two gases, A and B, each in a 1.0-L container with both
gases at the same temperature and pressure. The mass of gas A
in the container is 0.34 g and the mass of gas B in the container
is 0.48 g.

A

B

0.34 g

0.48 g

a. Which gas sample has the most molecules present? Explain.
b. Which gas sample has the largest average kinetic energy?
Explain.

Additional Exercises
c. Which gas sample has the fastest average velocity? Explain.
d. How can the pressure in the two containers be equal to each
other since the larger gas B molecules collide with the container walls more forcefully?
83. Consider three identical ﬂasks ﬁlled with different gases.
Flask A: CO at 760 torr and 0C
Flask B: N2 at 250 torr and 0C
Flask C: H2 at 100 torr and 0C
a. In which ﬂask will the molecules have the greatest average
kinetic energy?
b. In which ﬂask will the molecules have the greatest average
velocity?
84. Consider separate 1.0-L gaseous samples of H2, Xe, Cl2, and O2
all at STP.
a. Rank the gases in order of increasing average kinetic energy.
b. Rank the gases in order of increasing average velocity.
c. How can separate 1.0-L samples of O2 and H2 each have the
same average velocity?
85. Freon-12 is used as a refrigerant in central home air conditioners. The rate of effusion of Freon-12 to Freon-11 (molar mass 
137.4 g/mol) is 1.07:1. The formula of Freon-12 is one of the
following: CF4, CF3Cl, CF2Cl2, CFCl3, or CCl4. Which formula
is correct for Freon-12?
86. The rate of effusion of a particular gas was measured and found
to be 24.0 mL/min. Under the same conditions, the rate of effusion of pure methane (CH4) gas is 47.8 mL/min. What is the molar mass of the unknown gas?
87. One way of separating oxygen isotopes is by gaseous diffusion
of carbon monoxide. The gaseous diffusion process behaves like
an effusion process. Calculate the relative rates of effusion of
12 16
C O, 12C17O, and 12C18O. Name some advantages and disadvantages of separating oxygen isotopes by gaseous diffusion of
carbon dioxide instead of carbon monoxide.
88. It took 4.5 minutes for 1.0 L helium to effuse through a porous
barrier. How long will it take for 1.0 L Cl2 gas to effuse under
identical conditions?
89. Calculate the pressure exerted by 0.5000 mol N2 in a 1.0000-L
container at 25.0C
a. using the ideal gas law.
b. using the van der Waals equation.
c. Compare the results.
90. Calculate the pressure exerted by 0.5000 mol N2 in a 10.000-L
container at 25.0C
a. using the ideal gas law.
b. using the van der Waals equation.
c. Compare the results.
d. Compare the results with those in Exercise 89.

Atmosphere Chemistry
91. Use the data in Table 5.4 to calculate the partial pressure of He
in dry air assuming that the total pressure is 1.0 atm. Assuming
a temperature of 25C, calculate the number of He atoms per cubic centimeter.

223

92. A 1.0-L sample of air is collected at 25C at sea level (1.00 atm).
Estimate the volume this sample of air would have at an altitude
of 15 km (see Fig. 5.30).
93. Write reactions to show how nitric and sulfuric acids are produced in the atmosphere.
94. Write reactions to show how the nitric and sulfuric acids in acid
rain react with marble and limestone. (Both marble and limestone are primarily calcium carbonate.)

Additional Exercises
95. Draw a qualitative graph to show how the ﬁrst property varies
with the second in each of the following (assume 1 mol of an
ideal gas and T in kelvins).
a. PV versus V with constant T
b. P versus T with constant V
c. T versus V with constant P
d. P versus V with constant T
e. P versus 1V with constant T
f. PVT versus P
96. At STP, 1.0 L Br2 reacts completely with 3.0 L F2, producing
2.0 L of a product. What is the formula of the product? (All substances are gases.)
97. A form of Boyle’s law is PV  k (at constant T and n). Table
5.1 contains actual data from pressure–volume experiments
conducted by Robert Boyle. The value of k in most
experiments is 14.1  102 in Hg  in3. Express k in units of
atm  L. In Sample Exercise 5.3, k was determined for NH3 at
various pressures and volumes. Give some reasons why the k
values differ so dramatically between Sample Exercise 5.3 and
Table 5.1.
98. An ideal gas at 7C is in a spherical ﬂexible container having a
radius of 1.00 cm. The gas is heated at constant pressure to 88C.
Determine the radius of the spherical container after the gas is
heated. (Volume of a sphere  43 r 3.)
99. A 2.747-g sample of manganese metal is reacted with excess
HCl gas to produce 3.22 L of H2(g) at 373 K and 0.951 atm
and a manganese chloride compound (MnClx). What is the
formula of the manganese chloride compound produced in the
reaction?
100. Equal moles of hydrogen gas and oxygen gas are mixed in a
ﬂexible reaction vessel and then sparked to initiate the formation of gaseous water. Assuming that the reaction goes to completion, what is the ratio of the ﬁnal volume of the gas mixture
to the initial volume of the gas mixture if both volumes are measured at the same temperature and pressure?
101. A 15.0-L tank is ﬁlled with H2 to a pressure of 2.00  102 atm.
How many balloons (each 2.00 L) can be inﬂated to a pressure
of 1.00 atm from the tank? Assume that there is no temperature
change and that the tank cannot be emptied below 1.00 atm
pressure.
102. A spherical glass container of unknown volume contains helium
gas at 25C and 1.960 atm. When a portion of the helium is withdrawn and adjusted to 1.00 atm at 25C, it is found to have a

224

Chapter Five

Gases

volume of 1.75 cm3. The gas remaining in the ﬁrst container
shows a pressure of 1.710 atm. Calculate the volume of the spherical container.
103. A 2.00-L sample of O2(g) was collected over water at a total
pressure of 785 torr and 25C. When the O2(g) was dried (water vapor removed), the gas had a volume of 1.94 L at 25C and
785 torr. Calculate the vapor pressure of water at 25C.
104. A 20.0-L stainless steel container was charged with 2.00 atm of
hydrogen gas and 3.00 atm of oxygen gas. A spark ignited the
mixture, producing water. What is the pressure in the tank at
25C? at 125C?
105. Metallic molybdenum can be produced from the mineral molybdenite, MoS2. The mineral is ﬁrst oxidized in air to molybdenum trioxide and sulfur dioxide. Molybdenum trioxide is then
reduced to metallic molybdenum using hydrogen gas. The balanced equations are

would be the pressure of CO2 inside the wine bottle at 25C?
(The density of ethanol is 0.79 g/cm3.)
108. One of the chemical controversies of the nineteenth century concerned the element beryllium (Be). Berzelius originally claimed
that beryllium was a trivalent element (forming Be3 ions) and
that it gave an oxide with the formula Be2O3. This resulted in
a calculated atomic mass of 13.5 for beryllium. In formulating
his periodic table, Mendeleev proposed that beryllium was
divalent (forming Be2 ions) and that it gave an oxide with the
formula BeO. This assumption gives an atomic mass of 9.0. In
1894, A. Combes (Comptes Rendus 1894, p. 1221) reacted
beryllium with the anion C5H7O2 and measured the density
of the gaseous product. Combes’s data for two different experiments are as follows:

MoS2 1s2  72 O2 1g2 S MoO3 1s2  2SO2 1g2

MoO3 1s2  3H2 1g2 S Mo1s2  3H2O1l2

Calculate the volumes of air and hydrogen gas at 17C and 1.00
atm that are necessary to produce 1.00  103 kg of pure molybdenum from MoS2. Assume air contains 21% oxygen by volume
and assume 100% yield for each reaction.
106. Nitric acid is produced commercially by the Ostwald process. In
the ﬁrst step ammonia is oxidized to nitric oxide:
4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 S 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2
Assume this reaction is carried out in the apparatus diagramed
below.

Mass
Volume
Temperature
Pressure

I

II

0.2022 g
22.6 cm3
13C
765.2 mm Hg

0.2224 g
26.0 cm3
17C
764.6 mm

If beryllium is a divalent metal, the molecular formula of the
product will be Be(C5H7O2)2; if it is trivalent, the formula will
be Be(C5H7O2)3. Show how Combes’s data help to conﬁrm that
beryllium is a divalent metal.
109. The nitrogen content of organic compounds can be determined
by the Dumas method. The compound in question is ﬁrst reacted
by passage over hot CuO(s):
Hot
Compound —CuO1s2
¡ N2 1g2  CO2 1g2  H2O1g2

2.00 L NH3
0.500 atm

1.00 L O2
1.50 atm

The stopcock between the two reaction containers is opened, and
the reaction proceeds using proper catalysts. Calculate the partial pressure of NO after the reaction is complete. Assume 100%
yield for the reaction, assume the ﬁnal container volume is
3.00 L, and assume the temperature is constant.
107. In the “Méthode Champenoise,” grape juice is fermented in a
wine bottle to produce sparkling wine. The reaction is
C6H12O6 1aq2 ¡ 2C2H5OH1aq2  2CO2 1g2
Fermentation of 750. mL grape juice (density  1.0 g/cm3) is
allowed to take place in a bottle with a total volume of 825 mL
until 12% by volume is ethanol (C2H5OH). Assuming that the
CO2 is insoluble in H2O (actually, a wrong assumption), what

The product gas is then passed through a concentrated solution
of KOH to remove the CO2. After passage through the KOH solution, the gas contains N2 and is saturated with water vapor. In
a given experiment a 0.253-g sample of a compound produced
31.8 mL N2 saturated with water vapor at 25C and 726 torr.
What is the mass percent of nitrogen in the compound? (The
vapor pressure of water at 25C is 23.8 torr.)
110. A compound containing only C, H, and N yields the following data.
i. Complete combustion of 35.0 mg of the compound produced
33.5 mg of CO2 and 41.1 mg of H2O.
ii. A 65.2-mg sample of the compound was analyzed for
nitrogen by the Dumas method (see Exercise 109), giving
35.6 mL of N2 at 740. torr and 25C.
iii. The effusion rate of the compound as a gas was measured
and found to be 24.6 mL/min. The effusion rate of argon gas,
under identical conditions, is 26.4 mL/min.
What is the molecular formula of the compound?
111. An organic compound contains C, H, N, and O. Combustion of
0.1023 g of the compound in excess oxygen yielded 0.2766 g of
CO2 and 0.0991 g of H2O. A sample of 0.4831 g of the compound was analyzed for nitrogen by the Dumas method (see Exercise 109). At STP, 27.6 mL of dry N2 was obtained. In a third
experiment, the density of the compound as a gas was found to

Challenge Problems
be 4.02 g/L at 127C and 256 torr. What are the empirical and
molecular formulas of the compound?
112. Consider the following diagram:

B
H2
A

Container A (with porous walls) is ﬁlled with air at STP. It is
then inserted into a large enclosed container (B), which is then
ﬂushed with H2(g). What will happen to the pressure inside container A? Explain your answer.
113. Without looking at tables of values, which of the following gases
would you expect to have the largest value of the van der Waals
constant b: H2, N2, CH4, C2H6, or C3H8? From the values in Table
5.3 for the van der Waals constant a for the gases H2, CO2, N2,
and CH4, predict which of these gas molecules show the strongest
intermolecular attractions.

Challenge Problems
114. An important process for the production of acrylonitrile (C3H3N)
is given by the following reaction:
2C3H6 1g2  2NH3 1g2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2C3H3N1g2  6H2O1g2
A 150.-L reactor is charged to the following partial pressures
at 25C:
PC3H6  0.500 MPa
PNH3  0.800 MPa
PO2  1.500 MPa
What mass of acrylonitrile can be produced from this mixture
(Mpa  106 Pa)?
115. A chemist weighed out 5.14 g of a mixture containing unknown
amounts of BaO(s) and CaO(s) and placed the sample in a 1.50-L
ﬂask containing CO2(g) at 30.0C and 750. torr. After the reaction
to form BaCO3(s) and CaCO3(s) was completed, the pressure of
CO2(g) remaining was 230. torr. Calculate the mass percentages
of CaO(s) and BaO(s) in the mixture.
116. A mixture of chromium and zinc weighing 0.362 g was reacted with an excess of hydrochloric acid. After all the metals in the mixture reacted, 225 mL of dry hydrogen gas was
collected at 27C and 750. torr. Determine the mass percent
Zn in the metal sample. [Zinc reacts with hydrochloric acid
to produce zinc chloride and hydrogen gas; chromium reacts
with hydrochloric acid to produce chromium(III) chloride and
hydrogen gas.]

225

117. Consider a sample of a hydrocarbon (a compound consisting of
only carbon and hydrogen) at 0.959 atm and 298 K. Upon combusting the entire sample in oxygen, you collect a mixture of
gaseous carbon dioxide and water vapor at 1.51 atm and 375 K.
This mixture has a density of 1.391 g/L and occupies a volume
four times as large as that of the pure hydrocarbon. Determine
the molecular formula of the hydrocarbon.
118. You have an equimolar mixture of the gases SO2 and O2, along
with some He, in a container ﬁtted with a piston. The density of
this mixture at STP is 1.924 g/L. Assume ideal behavior and
constant temperature and pressure.
a. What is the mole fraction of He in the original mixture?
b. The SO2 and O2 react to completion to form SO3. What is the
density of the gas mixture after the reaction is complete?
119. Methane (CH4) gas ﬂows into a combustion chamber at a rate
of 200. L/min at 1.50 atm and ambient temperature. Air is added
to the chamber at 1.00 atm and the same temperature, and the
gases are ignited.
a. To ensure complete combustion of CH4 to CO2(g) and H2O(g),
three times as much oxygen as is necessary is reacted. Assuming air is 21 mole percent O2 and 79 mole percent N2,
calculate the ﬂow rate of air necessary to deliver the required
amount of oxygen.
b. Under the conditions in part a, combustion of methane
was not complete as a mixture of CO2(g) and CO(g) was
produced. It was determined that 95.0% of the carbon in
the exhaust gas was present in CO2. The remainder was present as carbon in CO. Calculate the composition of the
exhaust gas in terms of mole fraction of CO, CO2, O2, N2,
and H2O. Assume CH4 is completely reacted and N2 is
unreacted.
120. A steel cylinder contains 5.00 mol of graphite (pure carbon) and
5.00 mol of O2. The mixture is ignited and all the graphite reacts. Combustion produces a mixture of CO gas and CO2 gas.
After the cylinder has cooled to its original temperature, it is
found that the pressure of the cylinder has increased by 17.0%.
Calculate the mole fractions of CO, CO2, and O2 in the ﬁnal
gaseous mixture.
121. The total mass that can be lifted by a balloon is given by the difference between the mass of air displaced by the balloon and the
mass of the gas inside the balloon. Consider a hot-air balloon
that approximates a sphere 5.00 m in diameter and contains air
heated to 65C. The surrounding air temperature is 21C. The
pressure in the balloon is equal to the atmospheric pressure,
which is 745 torr.
a. What total mass can the balloon lift? Assume that the average
molar mass of air is 29.0 g/mol. (Hint: Heated air is less dense
than cool air.)
b. If the balloon is ﬁlled with enough helium at 21C and 745
torr to achieve the same volume as in part a, what total mass
can the balloon lift?
c. What mass could the hot-air balloon in part a lift if it were on
the ground in Denver, Colorado, where a typical atmospheric
pressure is 630. torr?
122. You have a sealed, ﬂexible balloon ﬁlled with argon gas. The
atmospheric pressure is 1.00 atm and the temperature is

226

Chapter Five

Gases

25C. The air has a mole fraction of nitrogen of 0.790, the rest
being oxygen.
a. Explain why the balloon would ﬂoat when heated. Make sure
to discuss which factors change and which remain constant,
and why this matters. Be complete.
b. Above what temperature would you heat the balloon so that
it would ﬂoat?
123. You have a helium balloon at 1.00 atm and 25C. You want to
make a hot-air balloon with the same volume and same lift as
the helium balloon. Assume air is 79.0% nitrogen, 21.0% oxygen
by volume. The “lift” of a balloon is given by the difference between the mass of air displaced by the balloon and the mass of
gas inside the balloon.
a. Will the temperature in the hot-air balloon have to be higher
or lower than 25C? Explain.
b. Calculate the temperature of the air required for the hot-air
balloon to provide the same lift as the helium balloon at 1.00
atm and 25C. Assume atmospheric conditions are 1.00 atm
and 25C.
124. We state that the ideal gas law tends to hold best at low pressures and high temperatures. Show how the van der Waals equation simpliﬁes to the ideal gas law under these conditions.
125. Atmospheric scientists often use mixing ratios to express the concentrations of trace compounds in air. Mixing ratios are often
expressed as ppmv (parts per million volume):
ppmv of X 

If 2.55  102 mL of NO(g) is isolated at 29C and 1.5 atm, what
amount (moles) of UO2 was used in the reaction?
128. Silane, SiH4, is the silicon analogue of methane, CH4. It is
prepared industrially according to the following equations:
Si1s2  3HCl1g2 ¡ HSiCl3 1l2  H2 1g2
4HSiCl3 1l2 ¡ SiH4 1g2  3SiCl4 1l2
a. If 156 mL of HSiCl3 (d  1.34 g/mL) is isolated when 15.0 L
of HCl at 10.0 atm and 35C is used, what is the percent yield
of HSiCl3?
b. When 156 mL of HSiCl3 is heated, what volume of SiH4 at
10.0 atm and 35C will be obtained if the percent yield of the
reaction is 93.1%?
129. Solid thorium(IV) ﬂuoride has a boiling point of 1680C. What
is the density of a sample of gaseous thorium(IV) ﬂuoride at its
boiling point under a pressure of 2.5 atm in a 1.7-L container?
Which gas will effuse faster at 1680C, thorium(IV) ﬂuoride or
uranium(III) ﬂuoride? How much faster?
130. Natural gas is a mixture of hydrocarbons, primarily methane
(CH4) and ethane (C2H6). A typical mixture might have
methane  0.915 and ethane  0.085. What are the partial pressures of the two gases in a 15.00-L container of natural gas at
20.C and 1.44 atm? Assuming complete combustion of both
gases in the natural gas sample, what is the total mass of water
formed?

vol. of X at STP
 106
total vol. of air at STP

On a recent autumn day, the concentration of carbon monoxide
in the air in downtown Denver, Colorado, reached 3.0  102
ppmv. The atmospheric pressure at that time was 628 torr, and
the temperature was 0C.
a. What was the partial pressure of CO?
b. What was the concentration of CO in molecules per cubic
centimeter?
126. Nitrogen gas (N2) reacts with hydrogen gas (H2) to form ammonia gas (NH3). You have nitrogen and hydrogen gases in a
15.0-L container ﬁtted with a movable piston (the piston allows
the container volume to change so as to keep the pressure constant inside the container). Initially the partial pressure of each
reactant gas is 1.00 atm. Assume the temperature is constant and
that the reaction goes to completion.
a. Calculate the partial pressure of ammonia in the container after the reaction has reached completion.
b. Calculate the volume of the container after the reaction has
reached completion.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

127. In the presence of nitric acid, UO2 undergoes a redox process.
It is converted to UO22 and nitric oxide (NO) gas is produced
according to the following unbalanced equation:
NO3 1aq2  UO2 1aq2 ¡ NO1g2  UO22 1aq2

Marathon Problem*
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

131. Use the following information to identify element A and compound B, then answer questions a and b.
An empty glass container has a mass of 658.572 g. It has a
mass of 659.452 g after it has been ﬁlled with nitrogen gas at a
pressure of 790. torr and a temperature of 15C. When the container is evacuated and reﬁlled with a certain element (A) at a
pressure of 745 torr and a temperature of 26C, it has a mass of
660.59 g.
Compound B, a gaseous organic compound that consists of
85.6% carbon and 14.4% hydrogen by mass, is placed in a stainless steel vessel (10.68 L) with excess oxygen gas. The vessel is
placed in a constant-temperature bath at 22C. The pressure in
the vessel is 11.98 atm. In the bottom of the vessel is a container
that is packed with Ascarite and a desiccant. Ascarite is asbestos
impregnated with sodium hydroxide; it quantitatively absorbs
carbon dioxide:
2NaOH1s2  CO2 1g2 ¡ Na2CO3 1s2  H2O1l2

*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 68,
No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of Chemical
Education, Inc.

Marathon Problem
The desiccant is anhydrous magnesium perchlorate, which
quantitatively absorbs the water produced by the combustion reaction as well as the water produced by the above reaction. Neither the Ascarite nor the desiccant reacts with compound B or
oxygen. The total mass of the container with the Ascarite and
desiccant is 765.3 g.
The combustion reaction of compound B is initiated by a
spark. The pressure immediately rises, then begins to decrease,
and ﬁnally reaches a steady value of 6.02 atm. The stainless steel
vessel is carefully opened, and the mass of the container inside
the vessel is found to be 846.7 g.

227

A and B react quantitatively in a 1:1 mole ratio to form one
mole of the single product, gas C.
a. How many grams of C will be produced if 10.0 L of A and
8.60 L of B (each at STP) are reacted by opening a stopcock
connecting the two samples?
b. What will be the total pressure in the system?
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

6 Thermochemistry
Contents
6.1
•
6.2
•
•
6.3
•
6.4
6.5
•
•
•
6.6
•
•
•

The Nature of Energy
Chemical Energy
Enthalpy and Calorimetry
Enthalpy
Calorimetry
Hess’s Law
Characteristics of Enthalpy
Changes
Standard Enthalpies of
Formation
Present Sources of Energy
Petroleum and Natural Gas
Coal
Effects of Carbon Dioxide on
Climate
New Energy Sources
Coal Conversion
Hydrogen as a Fuel
Other Energy Alternatives

Hot lava ﬂowing into the ocean in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park creates clouds of steam.

228

E

nergy is the essence of our very existence as individuals and as a society. The food
that we eat furnishes the energy to live, work, and play, just as the coal and oil consumed
by manufacturing and transportation systems power our modern industrialized civilization.
In the past, huge quantities of carbon-based fossil fuels have been available for the
taking. This abundance of fuels has led to a world society with a voracious appetite for
energy, consuming millions of barrels of petroleum every day. We are now dangerously
dependent on the dwindling supplies of oil, and this dependence is an important source
of tension among nations in today’s world. In an incredibly short time we have moved
from a period of ample and cheap supplies of petroleum to one of high prices and uncertain
supplies. If our present standard of living is to be maintained, we must ﬁnd alternatives
to petroleum. To do this, we need to know the relationship between chemistry and energy,
which we explore in this chapter.
There are additional problems with fossil fuels. The waste products from burning
fossil fuels signiﬁcantly affect our environment. For example, when a carbon-based fuel
is burned, the carbon reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide, which is released into
the atmosphere. Although much of this carbon dioxide is consumed in various natural
processes such as photosynthesis and the formation of carbonate materials, the amount of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is steadily increasing. This increase is signiﬁcant because
atmospheric carbon dioxide absorbs heat radiated from the earth’s surface and radiates it
back toward the earth. Since this is an important mechanism for controlling the earth’s
temperature, many scientists fear that an increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide
will warm the earth, causing signiﬁcant changes in climate. In addition, impurities in the
fossil fuels react with components of the air to produce air pollution. We discussed some
aspects of this problem in Chapter 5.
Just as energy is important to our society on a macroscopic scale, it is critically
important to each living organism on a microscopic scale. The living cell is a miniature
chemical factory powered by energy from chemical reactions. The process of cellular
respiration extracts the energy stored in sugars and other nutrients to drive the various
tasks of the cell. Although the extraction process is more complex and more subtle, the
energy obtained from “fuel” molecules by the cell is the same as would be obtained from
burning the fuel to power an internal combustion engine.
Whether it is an engine or a cell that is converting energy from one form to another,
the processes are all governed by the same principles, which we will begin to explore in
this chapter. Additional aspects of energy transformation will be covered in Chapter 16.

6.1
One interesting deﬁnition of energy is
that which is needed to oppose natural
attractions (for example, gravity and
electrostatic attractions).
The total energy content of the universe
is constant.

The Nature of Energy

Although the concept of energy is quite familiar, energy itself is rather difﬁcult to deﬁne
precisely. We will deﬁne energy as the capacity to do work or to produce heat. In this
chapter we will concentrate speciﬁcally on the heat transfer that accompanies chemical
processes.
One of the most important characteristics of energy is that it is conserved. The law
of conservation of energy states that energy can be converted from one form to another
but can be neither created nor destroyed. That is, the energy of the universe is constant.
Energy can be classiﬁed as either potential or kinetic energy. Potential energy is energy
due to position or composition. For example, water behind a dam has potential energy
that can be converted to work when the water ﬂows down through turbines, thereby creating

229

230

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

A

Held in place
B

(a) Initial

B
A
(b) Final

FIGURE 6.1
(a) In the initial positions, ball A has a
higher potential energy than ball B. (b)
After A has rolled down the hill, the potential energy lost by A has been converted to
random motions of the components of the
hill (frictional heating) and to the increase
in the potential energy of B.

Heat involves a transfer of energy.

This infrared photo of a house shows
where energy leaks occur. The more red the
color, the more energy (heat) is leaving the
house.

Visualization: Coffee Creamer
Flammability

electricity. Attractive and repulsive forces also lead to potential energy. The energy released
when gasoline is burned results from differences in attractive forces between the nuclei
and electrons in the reactants and products. The kinetic energy of an object is energy due
to the motion of the object and depends on the mass of the object m and its velocity v:
KE  12mv2.
Energy can be converted from one form to another. For example, consider the two
balls in Fig. 6.1(a). Ball A, because of its higher position initially, has more potential
energy than ball B. When A is released, it moves down the hill and strikes B. Eventually,
the arrangement shown in Fig. 6.1(b) is achieved. What has happened in going from the
initial to the ﬁnal arrangement? The potential energy of A has decreased, but since energy
is conserved, all the energy lost by A must be accounted for. How is this energy distributed?
Initially, the potential energy of A is changed to kinetic energy as the ball rolls down
the hill. Part of this kinetic energy is then transferred to B, causing it to be raised to a
higher ﬁnal position. Thus the potential energy of B has been increased. However, since
the ﬁnal position of B is lower than the original position of A, some of the energy is still
unaccounted for. Both balls in their ﬁnal positions are at rest, so the missing energy cannot be due to their motions. What has happened to the remaining energy?
The answer lies in the interaction between the hill’s surface and the ball. As ball A
rolls down the hill, some of its kinetic energy is transferred to the surface of the hill as
heat. This transfer of energy is called frictional heating. The temperature of the hill increases very slightly as the ball rolls down.
Before we proceed further, it is important to recognize that heat and temperature are
decidedly different. As we saw in Chapter 5, temperature is a property that reﬂects the
random motions of the particles in a particular substance. Heat, on the other hand, involves
the transfer of energy between two objects due to a temperature difference. Heat is not a
substance contained by an object, although we often talk of heat as if this were true.
Note that in going from the initial to the ﬁnal arrangements in Fig. 6.1, ball B gains
potential energy because work was done by ball A on B. Work is deﬁned as force acting
over a distance. Work is required to raise B from its original position to its ﬁnal one. Part
of the original energy stored as potential energy in A has been transferred through work
to B, thereby increasing B’s potential energy. Thus there are two ways to transfer energy:
through work and through heat.
In rolling to the bottom of the hill shown in Fig. 6.1, ball A will always lose the same
amount of potential energy. However, the way that this energy transfer is divided between
work and heat depends on the speciﬁc conditions—the pathway. For example, the surface
of the hill might be so rough that the energy of A is expended completely through frictional
heating; A is moving so slowly when it hits B that it cannot move B to the next level. In this
case, no work is done. Regardless of the condition of the hill’s surface, the total energy transferred will be constant. However, the amounts of heat and work will differ. Energy change
is independent of the pathway; however, work and heat are both dependent on the pathway.
This brings us to a very important concept: the state function or state property. A state
function refers to a property of the system that depends only on its present state. A state function (property) does not depend in any way on the system’s past (or future). In other words,
the value of a state function does not depend on how the system arrived at the present state;
it depends only on the characteristics of the present state. This leads to a very important characteristic of a state function: A change in this function (property) in going from one state to
another state is independent of the particular pathway taken between the two states.
A nonscientiﬁc analogy that illustrates the difference between a state function and a
nonstate function is elevation on the earth’s surface and distance between two points.
In traveling from Chicago (elevation 674 ft) to Denver (elevation 5280 ft), the change
in elevation is always 5280  674  4606 ft regardless of the route taken between the
two cities. The distance traveled, however, depends on how you make the trip. Thus elevation is a function that does not depend on the route (pathway) but distance is pathway
dependent. Elevation is a state function and distance is not.

6.1 The Nature of Energy
Energy is a state function; work and heat
are not.

231

Of the functions considered in our present example, energy is a state function, but
work and heat are not state functions.

Chemical Energy
The ideas we have just illustrated using mechanical examples also apply to chemical systems. The combustion of methane, for example, is used to heat many homes in the United
States:
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2  energy 1heat2

Visualization: Sugar and
Potassium Chlorate

To discuss this reaction, we divide the universe into two parts: the system and the surroundings. The system is the part of the universe on which we wish to focus attention; the
surroundings include everything else in the universe. In this case we deﬁne the system as
the reactants and products of the reaction. The surroundings consist of the reaction container
(a furnace, for example), the room, and anything else other than the reactants and products.
When a reaction results in the evolution of heat, it is said to be exothermic (exo- is
a preﬁx meaning “out of”); that is, energy ﬂows out of the system. For example, in the
combustion of methane, energy ﬂows out of the system as heat. Reactions that absorb energy from the surroundings are said to be endothermic. When the heat ﬂow is into a system, the process is endothermic. For example, the formation of nitric oxide from nitrogen
and oxygen is endothermic:
N2 1g2  O2 1g2  energy 1heat2 ¡ 2NO1g2
Where does the energy, released as heat, come from in an exothermic reaction? The
answer lies in the difference in potential energies between the products and the reactants.
Which has lower potential energy, the reactants or the products? We know that total energy is conserved and that energy ﬂows from the system into the surroundings in an
exothermic reaction. This means that the energy gained by the surroundings must be equal
to the energy lost by the system. In the combustion of methane, the energy content of the
system decreases, which means that 1 mole of CO2 and 2 moles of H2O molecules (the
products) possess less potential energy than do 1 mole of CH4 and 2 moles of O2 molecules (the reactants). The heat ﬂow into the surroundings results from a lowering of the
potential energy of the reaction system. This always holds true. In any exothermic reaction, some of the potential energy stored in the chemical bonds is being converted to thermal energy (random kinetic energy) via heat.
The energy diagram for the combustion of methane is shown in Fig. 6.2, where (PE)
represents the change in potential energy stored in the bonds of the products as compared
with the bonds of the reactants. In other words, this quantity represents the difference between

System

Surroundings

FIGURE 6.2
The combustion of methane releases the
quantity of energy (PE) to the surroundings via heat ﬂow. This is an exothermic
process.

Potential energy

2 mol O2
1 mol CH4
( Reactants)
∆(PE)

Energy released to the surroundings as heat

2 mol H2O
1 mol CO2
( Products)

232

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

System

Surroundings

FIGURE 6.3
The energy diagram for the reaction of
nitrogen and oxygen to form nitric oxide.
This is an endothermic process: Heat [equal
in magnitude to (PE)] ﬂows into the
system from the surroundings.

Potential energy

2 mol NO
( Products)

∆(PE)

Heat absorbed from the surroundings

1 mol N2
1 mol O2
( Reactants)

the energy required to break the bonds in the reactants and the energy released when the
bonds in the products are formed. In an exothermic process, the bonds in the products are
stronger (on average) than those of the reactants. That is, more energy is released by forming the new bonds in the products than is consumed to break the bonds in the reactants. The
net result is that the quantity of energy (PE) is transferred to the surroundings through heat.
For an endothermic reaction, the situation is reversed, as shown in Fig. 6.3. Energy that
ﬂows into the system as heat is used to increase the potential energy of the system. In this
case the products have higher potential energy (weaker bonds on average) than the reactants.
The study of energy and its interconversions is called thermodynamics. The law of
conservation of energy is often called the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics and is stated as
follows: The energy of the universe is constant.
The internal energy E of a system can be deﬁned most precisely as the sum of the
kinetic and potential energies of all the “particles” in the system. The internal energy of
a system can be changed by a ﬂow of work, heat, or both. That is,
¢E  q  w
where E represents the change in the system’s internal energy, q represents heat, and
w represents work.
Thermodynamic quantities always consist of two parts: a number, giving the magnitude of the change, and a sign, indicating the direction of the ﬂow. The sign reﬂects the
system’s point of view. For example, if a quantity of energy ﬂows into the system via heat
(an endothermic process), q is equal to x, where the positive sign indicates that the system’s energy is increasing. On the other hand, when energy ﬂows out of the system via
heat (an exothermic process), q is equal to x, where the negative sign indicates that the
system’s energy is decreasing.

Surroundings

Surroundings

Energy

Energy

System

System

∆E < 0

∆E > 0

6.1 The Nature of Energy

The convention in this text is to take the
system’s point of view; q  x denotes
an exothermic process, and q  x
denotes an endothermic one.

Sample Exercise 6.1
The joule (J) is the fundamental SI unit
for energy:
J

In this text the same conventions also apply to the ﬂow of work. If the system does
work on the surroundings (energy ﬂows out of the system), w is negative. If the surroundings do work on the system (energy ﬂows into the system), w is positive. We deﬁne
work from the system’s point of view to be consistent for all thermodynamic quantities.
That is, in this convention the signs of both q and w reﬂect what happens to the system;
thus we use ¢E  q  w.
In this text we always take the system’s point of view. This convention is not followed in every area of science. For example, engineers are in the business of designing
machines to do work, that is, to make the system (the machine) transfer energy to its surroundings through work. Consequently, engineers deﬁne work from the surroundings’
point of view. In their convention, work that ﬂows out of the system is treated as positive
because the energy of the surroundings has increased. The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics is
then written E  q  w , where w signiﬁes work from the surroundings’ point of view.

Internal Energy
Calculate E for a system undergoing an endothermic process in which 15.6 kJ of heat
ﬂows and where 1.4 kJ of work is done on the system.
Solution

kg  m2
s

233

2

We use the equation

One kilojoule (kJ)  10 J.
3

¢E  q  w
where q  15.6 kJ, since the process is endothermic, and w  1.4 kJ, since work is
done on the system. Thus
¢E  15.6 kJ  1.4 kJ  17.0 kJ
The system has gained 17.0 kJ of energy.
See Exercises 6.21 and 6.22.

Visualization: Work versus
Energy Flow

P= F
A
P= F
A
Area = A

∆h

∆h

A common type of work associated with chemical processes is work done by a gas
(through expansion) or work done to a gas (through compression). For example, in an
automobile engine, the heat from the combustion of the gasoline expands the gases in
the cylinder to push back the piston, and this motion is then translated into the motion of
the car.
Suppose we have a gas conﬁned to a cylindrical container with a movable piston as
shown in Fig. 6.4, where F is the force acting on a piston of area A. Since pressure is
deﬁned as force per unit area, the pressure of the gas is
P

∆V
∆V

F
A

Work is deﬁned as force applied over a distance, so if the piston moves a distance
h, as shown in Fig. 6.4, then the work done is
(a) Initial
state

(b) Final
state

FIGURE 6.4
(a) The piston, moving a distance h
against a pressure P, does work on the surroundings. (b) Since the volume of a cylinder is the area of the base times its height,
the change in volume of the gas is given by
h  A  V.

Work  force  distance  F  ¢h
Since P  FA or F  P  A, then
Work  F  ¢h  P  A  ¢h
Since the volume of a cylinder equals the area of the piston times the height of the cylinder
(Fig. 6.4), the change in volume V resulting from the piston moving a distance h is
¢V  final volume  initial volume  A  ¢h

234

Chapter Six Thermochemistry
Substituting V  A  h into the expression for work gives
Work  P  A  ¢h  P¢V

w and P V have opposite signs because
when the gas expands ( V is positive),
work ﬂows into the surroundings (w is
negative).

This gives us the magnitude (size) of the work required to expand a gas V against a pressure P.
What about the sign of the work? The gas (the system) is expanding, moving the piston against the pressure. Thus the system is doing work on the surroundings, so from the
system’s point of view the sign of the work should be negative.
For an expanding gas, V is a positive quantity because the volume is increasing.
Thus V and w must have opposite signs, which leads to the equation
w  P¢V
Note that for a gas expanding against an external pressure P, w is a negative quantity as
required, since work ﬂows out of the system. When a gas is compressed, V is a negative quantity (the volume decreases), which makes w a positive quantity (work ﬂows into
the system).

Sample Exercise 6.2

PV Work
Calculate the work associated with the expansion of a gas from 46 L to 64 L at a constant external pressure of 15 atm.
Solution
For a gas at constant pressure,
w  P¢V

For an ideal gas, work can occur only
when its volume changes. Thus, if a gas
is heated at constant volume, the
pressure increases but no work occurs.

In this case P  15 atm and V  64  46  18 L. Hence
w  15 atm  18 L  270 L  atm
Note that since the gas expands, it does work on its surroundings.
Reality Check: Energy ﬂows out of the gas, so w is a negative quantity.
See Exercises 6.25 through 6.27.
In dealing with “PV work,” keep in mind that the P in P V always refers to the external pressure—the pressure that causes a compression or that resists an expansion.

Sample Exercise 6.3

Internal Energy, Heat, and Work
A balloon is being inﬂated to its full extent by heating the air inside it. In the ﬁnal stages
of this process, the volume of the balloon changes from 4.00  106 L to 4.50  106 L by
the addition of 1.3  108 J of energy as heat. Assuming that the balloon expands against a
constant pressure of 1.0 atm, calculate E for the process. (To convert between L  atm
and J, use 1 L  atm  101.3 J.)
Solution
To calculate E, we use the equation
¢E  q  w
Since the problem states that 1.3  108 J of energy is added as heat,
q  1.3  108 J

6.2 Enthalpy and Calorimetry

235

The work done can be calculated from the expression
w  P¢V
In this case P  1.0 atm and
¢V  Vfinal  Vinitial
 4.50  106 L  4.00  106 L  0.50  106 L  5.0  105 L
Thus
w  1.0 atm  5.0  105 L  5.0  105 L  atm
Note that the negative sign for w makes sense, since the gas is expanding and thus doing
work on the surroundings.
To calculate E, we must sum q and w. However, since q is given in units of J and
w is given in units of L  atm, we must change the work to units of joules:
w  5.0  105 L  atm 

101.3 J
 5.1  107 J
L  atm

Then
¢E  q  w  11.3  108 J2  15.1  107 J2  8  107 J

A propane burner is used to heat the air in
a hot-air balloon.

Reality Check: Since more energy is added through heating than the gas expends doing
work, there is a net increase in the internal energy of the gas in the balloon. Hence E is
positive.
See Exercises 6.28 through 6.30.

6.2

Enthalpy and Calorimetry

Enthalpy
So far we have discussed the internal energy of a system. A less familiar property of a
system is its enthalpy, H, which is deﬁned as
H  E  PV

Enthalpy is a state function. A change in
enthalpy does not depend on the
pathway between two states.

where E is the internal energy of the system, P is the pressure of the system, and V is the
volume of the system.
Since internal energy, pressure, and volume are all state functions, enthalpy is also a
state function. But what exactly is enthalpy? To help answer this question, consider a
process carried out at constant pressure and where the only work allowed is pressure–
volume work (w  P V ). Under these conditions, the expression
¢E  qP  w

Recall from the previous section that w
and P V have opposite signs:
wP V

becomes
¢E  qP  P¢V
or
qP  ¢E  P¢V
where qP is the heat at constant pressure.
We will now relate qP to a change in enthalpy. The deﬁnition of enthalpy is H 
E  PV. Therefore, we can say
Change in H  1change in E2  1change in PV2

236

Chapter Six Thermochemistry
or
¢H  ¢E  ¢1PV 2
Since P is constant, the change in PV is due only to a change in volume. Thus
¢1PV2  P¢V
and
¢H  ¢E  P¢V
This expression is identical to the one we obtained for qP:
qP  ¢E  P¢V
Thus, for a process carried out at constant pressure and where the only work allowed is
that from a volume change, we have
¢H  qP

H  q only at constant pressure.
The change in enthalpy of a system has
no easily interpreted meaning except at
constant pressure, where H  heat.

At constant pressure (where only PV work is allowed), the change in enthalpy H of the
system is equal to the energy ﬂow as heat. This means that for a reaction studied at constant pressure, the ﬂow of heat is a measure of the change in enthalpy for the system. For
this reason, the terms heat of reaction and change in enthalpy are used interchangeably
for reactions studied at constant pressure.
For a chemical reaction, the enthalpy change is given by the equation
¢H  Hproducts  Hreactants

At constant pressure, exothermic means
H is negative; endothermic means H
is positive.

Sample Exercise 6.4

In a case in which the products of a reaction have a greater enthalpy than the reactants,
H will be positive. Thus heat will be absorbed by the system, and the reaction is
endothermic. On the other hand, if the enthalpy of the products is less than that of the
reactants, H will be negative. In this case the overall decrease in enthalpy is achieved
by the generation of heat, and the reaction is exothermic.

Enthalpy
When 1 mole of methane (CH4) is burned at constant pressure, 890 kJ of energy is released as heat. Calculate H for a process in which a 5.8-g sample of methane is burned
at constant pressure.
Solution
At constant pressure, 890 kJ of energy per mole of CH4 is produced as heat:
qP  ¢H  890 kJ/mol CH4
Note that the minus sign indicates an exothermic process. In this case, a 5.8-g sample of
CH4 (molar mass  16.0 g/mol) is burned. Since this amount is smaller than 1 mole, less
than 890 kJ will be released as heat. The actual value can be calculated as follows:
5.8 g CH4 

1 mol CH4
 0.36 mol CH4
16.0 g CH4

and
0.36 mol CH4 

890 kJ
 320 kJ
mol CH4

Thus, when a 5.8-g sample of CH4 is burned at constant pressure,
¢H  heat flow  320 kJ
See Exercises 6.35 through 6.38.

6.2 Enthalpy and Calorimetry

TABLE 6.1 The Speciﬁc Heat
Capacities of Some Common
Substances

Substance

Speciﬁc Heat
Capacity
(J/C  g)

H2O(l)
H2O(s)
Al(s)
Fe(s)
Hg(l)
C(s)

4.18
2.03
0.89
0.45
0.14
0.71

Speciﬁc heat capacity: the energy
required to raise the temperature of one
gram of a substance by one degree
Celsius.
Molar heat capacity: the energy
required to raise the temperature of one
mole of a substance by one degree
Celsius.

Thermometer

Styrofoam
cover
Styrofoam
cups

Stirrer

FIGURE 6.5
A coffee-cup calorimeter made of two
Styrofoam cups.

237

Calorimetry
The device used experimentally to determine the heat associated with a chemical reaction
is called a calorimeter. Calorimetry, the science of measuring heat, is based on observing the temperature change when a body absorbs or discharges energy as heat. Substances
respond differently to being heated. One substance might require a great deal of heat energy to raise its temperature by one degree, whereas another will exhibit the same temperature change after absorbing relatively little heat. The heat capacity C of a substance,
which is a measure of this property, is deﬁned as
C

heat absorbed
increase in temperature

When an element or a compound is heated, the energy required will depend on
the amount of the substance present (for example, it takes twice as much energy to
raise the temperature of two grams of water by one degree than it takes to raise the
temperature of one gram of water by one degree). Thus, in deﬁning the heat capacity
of a substance, the amount of substance must be speciﬁed. If the heat capacity is
given per gram of substance, it is called the speciﬁc heat capacity, and its units are
J/C  g or J/K  g. If the heat capacity is given per mole of the substance, it is called
the molar heat capacity, and it has the units J/C  mol or J/K  mol. The speciﬁc heat
capacities of some common substances are given in Table 6.1. Note from this table
that the heat capacities of metals are very different from that of water. It takes much
less energy to change the temperature of a gram of a metal by 1C than for a gram of
water.
Although the calorimeters used for highly accurate work are precision instruments, a
very simple calorimeter can be used to examine the fundamentals of calorimetry. All we
need are two nested Styrofoam cups with a cover through which a stirrer and thermometer can be inserted, as shown in Fig. 6.5. This device is called a “coffee-cup calorimeter.”
The outer cup is used to provide extra insulation. The inner cup holds the solution in which
the reaction occurs.
The measurement of heat using a simple calorimeter such as that shown in
Fig. 6.5 is an example of constant-pressure calorimetry, since the pressure (atmospheric pressure) remains constant during the process. Constant-pressure calorimetry
is used in determining the changes in enthalpy (heats of reactions) for reactions
occurring in solution. Recall that under these conditions, the change in enthalpy equals
the heat.
For example, suppose we mix 50.0 mL of 1.0 M HCl at 25.0C with 50.0 mL of 1.0 M
NaOH also at 25C in a calorimeter. After the reactants are mixed by stirring, the
temperature is observed to increase to 31.9C. As we saw in Section 4.8, the net ionic
equation for this reaction is
H 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2
When these reactants (each originally at the same temperature) are mixed, the temperature of the mixed solution is observed to increase. Therefore, the chemical reaction
must be releasing energy as heat. This released energy increases the random motions of
the solution components, which in turn increases the temperature. The quantity of energy
released can be determined from the temperature increase, the mass of solution, and the
speciﬁc heat capacity of the solution. For an approximate result, we will assume that the
calorimeter does not absorb or leak any heat and that the solution can be treated as if it
were pure water with a density of 1.0 g/mL.
We also need to know the heat required to raise the temperature of a given amount
of water by 1C. Table 6.1 lists the speciﬁc heat capacity of water as 4.18 J/C  g.
This means that 4.18 J of energy is required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water
by 1C.

238

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Nature Has Hot Plants
he voodoo lily is a beautiful, seductive—and foulsmelling—plant. The exotic-looking lily features an elaborate reproductive mechanism—a purple spike that can reach
nearly 3 feet in length and is cloaked by a hoodlike leaf. But
approach to the plant reveals bad news—it smells terrible!
Despite its antisocial odor, this putrid plant has fascinated biologists for many years because of its ability
to generate heat. At the peak of its metabolic activity,
the plant’s blossom can be as much as 15C above its ambient temperature. To generate this much heat, the metabolic rate of the plant must be close to that of a ﬂying
hummingbird!
What’s the purpose of this intense heat production? For
a plant faced with limited food supplies in the very competitive tropical climate where it grows, heat production
seems like a great waste of energy. The answer to this
mystery is that the voodoo lily is pollinated mainly by
carrion-loving insects. Thus the lily prepares a malodorous

T

If two reactants at the same temperature
are mixed and the resulting solution gets
warmer, this means the reaction taking
place is exothermic. An endothermic
reaction cools the solution.

mixture of chemicals characteristic of rotting meat, which it
then “cooks” off into the surrounding air to attract ﬂeshfeeding beetles and ﬂies. Then, once the insects enter the
pollination chamber, the high temperatures there (as high as
110F) cause the insects to remain very active to better carry
out their pollination duties.
The voodoo lily is only one of many such thermogenic
(heat-producing) plants. Another interesting example is the
eastern skunk cabbage, which produces enough heat to
bloom inside of a snow bank by creating its own ice caves.
These plants are of special interest to biologists because they
provide opportunities to study metabolic reactions that are
quite subtle in “normal” plants. For example, recent studies
have shown that salicylic acid, the active form of aspirin, is
probably very important in producing the metabolic bursts
in thermogenic plants.
Besides studying the dramatic heat effects in thermogenic plants, biologists are also interested in calorimetric

From these assumptions and deﬁnitions, we can calculate the heat (change in enthalpy)
for the neutralization reaction:
Energy released by the reaction
 energy absorbed by the solution
 specific heat capacity  mass of solution  increase in temperature
 s  m  ¢T
In this case the increase in temperature ( T )  31.9C  25.0C  6.9C, and the mass
of solution (m)  100.0 mL  1.0 g/mL  1.0  102 g. Thus
Energy released  s  m  ¢T
J
 a4.18
b11.0  102 g216.9°C2
°C  g
 2.9  103 J
How much energy would have been released if twice these amounts of solutions had
been mixed? The answer is that twice as much energy would have been produced. The
heat of a reaction is an extensive property; it depends directly on the amount of substance,
in this case on the amounts of reactants. In contrast, an intensive property is not related
to the amount of a substance. For example, temperature is an intensive property.
Enthalpies of reaction are often expressed in terms of moles of reacting substances.
The number of moles of H ions consumed in the preceding experiment is
50.0 mL 

1L
1.0 mol 

H  5.0  102 mol H 
1000 mL
L

Thus 2.9  103 J heat was released when 5.0  102 mol H ions reacted, or
2.9  103 J
 5.8  104 J/mol
5.0  102 mol H

6.2 Enthalpy and Calorimetry

239

studies of regular plants. For example, very precise
calorimeters have been designed that can be used to study
the heat produced, and thus the metabolic activities, of
clumps of cells no larger than a bread crumb. Several scientists have suggested that a single calorimetric measurement taking just a few minutes on a tiny plant might be useful in predicting the growth rate of the mature plant
throughout its lifetime. If true, this would provide a very
efﬁcient method for selecting the plants most likely to thrive
as adults.
Because the study of the heat production by plants
is an excellent way to learn about plant metabolism, this
continues to be a “hot” area of research.

The voodoo lily attracts pollinating insects with
its foul odor.

Notice that in this example we mentally
keep track of the direction of the energy
ﬂow and assign the correct sign at the
end of the calculation.

of heat released per 1.0 mol H ions neutralized. Thus the magnitude of the enthalpy
change per mole for the reaction
H 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2
is 58 kJ/mol. Since heat is evolved, H  58 kJ/mol.

Sample Exercise 6.5

Constant-Pressure Calorimetry
When 1.00 L of 1.00 M Ba(NO3)2 solution at 25.0C is mixed with 1.00 L of 1.00 M
Na2SO4 solution at 25C in a calorimeter, the white solid BaSO4 forms and the temperature of the mixture increases to 28.1C. Assuming that the calorimeter absorbs only a
negligible quantity of heat, that the speciﬁc heat capacity of the solution is 4.18 J/C  g,
and that the density of the ﬁnal solution is 1.0 g/mL, calculate the enthalpy change per
mole of BaSO4 formed.
Solution
The ions present before any reaction occurs are Ba2, NO3, Na , and SO42. The Na
and NO3 ions are spectator ions, since NaNO3 is very soluble in water and will not
precipitate under these conditions. The net ionic equation for the reaction is therefore
Ba2 1aq2  SO42 1aq2 ¡ BaSO4 1s2
Since the temperature increases, formation of the solid BaSO4 must be exothermic;
will be negative.

H

Heat evolved by reaction
 heat absorbed by solution
 specific heat capacity  mass of solution  increase in temperature

240

Chapter Six Thermochemistry
Since 1.00 L of each solution is used, the total solution volume is 2.00 L, and
1.0 g
1000 mL

 2.0  103 g
1L
mL
Temperature increase  28.1°C  25.0°C  3.1°C
Heat evolved  14.18 J/°C  g212.0  103 g213.1°C2  2.6  104 J
Mass of solution  2.00 L 

Thus
q  qP  ¢H  2.6  104 J
Since 1.0 L of 1.0 M Ba(NO3)2 contains 1 mol Ba2 ions and 1.0 L of 1.0 M Na2SO4
contains 1.0 mol SO42 ions, 1.0 mol solid BaSO4 is formed in this experiment. Thus the
enthalpy change per mole of BaSO4 formed is
¢H  2.6  104 J/mol  26 kJ/mol
See Exercises 6.51 through 6.54.
Calorimetry experiments also can be performed at constant volume. For example,
when a photographic ﬂashbulb ﬂashes, the bulb becomes very hot, because the reaction
of the zirconium or magnesium wire with the oxygen inside the bulb is exothermic. The
reaction occurs inside the ﬂashbulb, which is rigid and does not change volume. Under
these conditions, no work is done (because the volume must change for pressure–volume
work to be performed). To study the energy changes in reactions under conditions of constant volume, a “bomb calorimeter” (Fig. 6.6) is used. Weighed reactants are placed inside a rigid steel container (the “bomb”) and ignited. The energy change is determined by
measuring the increase in the temperature of the water and other calorimeter parts. For a
constant-volume process, the change in volume V is equal to zero, so work (which is
P V ) is also equal to zero. Therefore,
¢E  q  w  q  qV

Ignition
wires

(constant volume)

Thermometer

Stirrer

Insulating
container
Steel
bomb
Water

Reactants
in sample
cup

FIGURE 6.6
A bomb calorimeter. The reaction is carried out inside a rigid steel “bomb” (photo of actual disassembled “bomb’’ shown on
right), and the heat evolved is absorbed by the surrounding water and other calorimeter parts. The quantity of energy produced by the reaction can be calculated from the temperature increase.

6.2 Enthalpy and Calorimetry

241

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Firewalking: Magic or Science?
or millennia people have been amazed
at the ability of Eastern mystics to walk
across beds of glowing coals without any
apparent discomfort. Even in the United
States, thousands of people have performed feats of ﬁrewalking as part of motivational seminars. How is this possible?
Do ﬁrewalkers have supernatural powers?
Actually, there are good scientiﬁc explanations, based on the concepts covered
in this chapter, of why ﬁrewalking is possible. The ﬁrst important factor concerns
the heat capacity of feet. Because human
tissue is mainly composed of water, it has
a relatively large speciﬁc heat capacity.
This means that a large amount of energy
must be transferred from the coals to signiﬁcantly change the temperature of the
feet. During the brief contact between feet
and coals, there is relatively little time for
energy ﬂow so the feet do not reach a high
enough temperature to cause damage.
A group of ﬁrewalkers in Japan.
Second, although the surface of the
coals has a very high temperature, the red
hot layer is very thin. Therefore, the quantity of energy avail- energy as 1 gram of the same matter. This is why the tiny
able to heat the feet is smaller than might be expected. This spark from a sparkler does not hurt when it hits your hand.
factor points to the difference between temperature and heat. The spark has a very high temperature but has so little mass
Temperature reﬂects the intensity of the random kinetic en- that no signiﬁcant energy transfer occurs to your hand. This
ergy in a given sample of matter. The amount of energy avail- same argument applies to the very thin hot layer on the coals.
Thus, although ﬁrewalking is an impressive feat, there
able for heat ﬂow, on the other hand, depends on the quantity of matter at a given temperature—10 grams of matter at are several sound scientiﬁc reasons why it is possible (with
a given temperature contains 10 times as much thermal the proper training and a properly prepared bed of coals).

F

Suppose we wish to measure the energy of combustion of octane (C8H18), a component of gasoline. A 0.5269-g sample of octane is placed in a bomb calorimeter known to
have a heat capacity of 11.3 kJ/C. This means that 11.3 kJ of energy is required to raise
the temperature of the water and other parts of the calorimeter by 1C. The octane is ignited in the presence of excess oxygen, and the temperature increase of the calorimeter is
2.25C. The amount of energy released is calculated as follows:
Energy released by the reaction
 temperature increase  energy required to change the temperature by 1C
 T  heat capacity of calorimeter
 2.25°C  11.3 kJ/°C  25.4 kJ
This means that 25.4 kJ of energy was released by the combustion of 0.5269 g octane.

242

Chapter Six

The number of moles of octane is
0.5269 g octane 

1 mol octane
 4.614  103 mol octane
114.2 g octane

Since 25.4 kJ of energy was released for 4.614  103 mol octane, the energy released
per mole is
25.4 kJ
 5.50  103 kJ/mol
4.614  103 mol
Since the reaction is exothermic, E is negative:
¢Ecombustion  5.50  103 kJ/mol
Note that since no work is done in this case, E is equal to the heat.
¢E  q  w  q

since w  0

Thus q  5.50  10 kJ/mol.
3

Sample Exercise 6.6
Hydrogen’s potential as a fuel is
discussed in Section 6.6.

Constant-Volume Calorimetry
It has been suggested that hydrogen gas obtained by the decomposition of water might be
a substitute for natural gas (principally methane). To compare the energies of combustion
of these fuels, the following experiment was carried out using a bomb calorimeter with a
heat capacity of 11.3 kJ/C. When a 1.50-g sample of methane gas was burned with excess oxygen in the calorimeter, the temperature increased by 7.3C. When a 1.15-g sample of hydrogen gas was burned with excess oxygen, the temperature increase was 14.3C.
Calculate the energy of combustion (per gram) for hydrogen and methane.
Solution
We calculate the energy of combustion for methane using the heat capacity of the calorimeter (11.3 kJ/C) and the observed temperature increase of 7.3C:
Energy released in the combustion of 1.5 g CH4  111.3 kJ/°C217.3°C2
 83 kJ
83 kJ
Energy released in the combustion of 1 g CH4 
 55 kJ/g
1.5 g

The direction of energy ﬂow is indicated
by words in this example. Using signs to
designate the direction of energy ﬂow:
Ecombustion  55 kJ/g
for methane and

Similarly, for hydrogen
Energy released in the combustion of 1.15 g H2  111.3 kJ/°C2114.3°C2
 162 kJ
162 kJ
 141 kJ/g
Energy released in the combustion of 1 g H2 
1.15 g

Ecombustion  141 kJ/g
for hydrogen.

The energy released in the combustion of 1 g hydrogen is approximately 2.5 times that
for 1 g methane, indicating that hydrogen gas is a potentially useful fuel.
See Exercises 6.55 and 6.56.

6.3

H is not dependent on the reaction
pathway.

Hess’s Law

Since enthalpy is a state function, the change in enthalpy in going from some initial state
to some ﬁnal state is independent of the pathway. This means that in going from a particular set of reactants to a particular set of products, the change in enthalpy is the same
whether the reaction takes place in one step or in a series of steps. This principle is known
as Hess’s law and can be illustrated by examining the oxidation of nitrogen to produce
nitrogen dioxide. The overall reaction can be written in one step, where the enthalpy
change is represented by H1.
N2 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

¢H1  68 kJ

6.3 Hess’s Law

243

Two-step reaction
O2(g), 2NO(g)

O2(g), 2NO(g)

H (kJ)

∆H3 = –112 kJ

FIGURE 6.7
The principle of Hess’s law. The same
change in enthalpy occurs when nitrogen
and oxygen react to form nitrogen dioxide,
regardless of whether the reaction occurs in
one (red) or two (blue) steps.

Visualization: Hess’s Law

∆H2 = 180 kJ

2NO2(g)

68 kJ

2NO2(g)
∆H1 = 68 kJ
= ∆H2 + ∆H3 = 180 kJ – 112 kJ
N2(g), 2O2(g)

N2(g), 2O2(g)

One-step reaction

This reaction also can be carried out in two distinct steps, with enthalpy changes designated by H2 and H3:
N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2
2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

Net reaction: N2 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

¢H2  180 kJ
¢H3  112 kJ
¢H2  ¢H3  68 kJ

Note that the sum of the two steps gives the net, or overall, reaction and that
¢H1  ¢H2  ¢H3  68 kJ
The principle of Hess’s law is shown schematically in Fig. 6.7.

Characteristics of Enthalpy Changes
Reversing the direction of a reaction
changes the sign of H.

To use Hess’s law to compute enthalpy changes for reactions, it is important to understand two characteristics of H for a reaction:
1. If a reaction is reversed, the sign of H is also reversed.
2. The magnitude of H is directly proportional to the quantities of reactants and products in a reaction. If the coefﬁcients in a balanced reaction are multiplied by an integer,
the value of H is multiplied by the same integer.
Both these rules follow in a straightforward way from the properties of enthalpy changes.
The ﬁrst rule can be explained by recalling that the sign of H indicates the direction of
the heat ﬂow at constant pressure. If the direction of the reaction is reversed, the direction of the heat ﬂow also will be reversed. To see this, consider the preparation of xenon
tetraﬂuoride, which was the ﬁrst binary compound made from a noble gas:
Xe1g2  2F2 1g2 ¡ XeF4 1s2

¢H  251 kJ

This reaction is exothermic, and 251 kJ of energy ﬂows into the surroundings as heat. On
the other hand, if the colorless XeF4 crystals are decomposed into the elements, according to the equation
Crystals of xenon tetraﬂuoride, the ﬁrst
reported binary compound containing a
noble gas element.

XeF4 1s2 ¡ Xe1g2  2F2 1g2

the opposite energy ﬂow occurs because 251 kJ of energy must be added to the system
to produce this endothermic reaction. Thus, for this reaction, H  251 kJ.
The second rule comes from the fact that H is an extensive property, depending on the
amount of substances reacting. For example, since 251 kJ of energy is evolved for the reaction
Xe1g2  2F2 1g2 ¡ XeF4 1s2

244

Chapter Six

then for a preparation involving twice the quantities of reactants and products, or
2Xe1g2  4F2 1g2 ¡ 2XeF4 1s2
twice as much heat would be evolved:
¢H  21251 kJ2  502 kJ

Sample Exercise 6.7

Hess’s Law I
Two forms of carbon are graphite, the soft, black, slippery material used in “lead” pencils
and as a lubricant for locks, and diamond, the brilliant, hard gemstone. Using the enthalpies
of combustion for graphite (394 kJ/mol) and diamond (396 kJ/mol), calculate H for
the conversion of graphite to diamond:
Cgraphite 1s2 ¡ Cdiamond 1s2
Solution
The combustion reactions are
Cgraphite 1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2
Cdiamond 1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2

¢H  394 kJ
¢H  396 kJ

Note that if we reverse the second reaction (which means we must change the sign of H)
and sum the two reactions, we obtain the desired reaction:
Cgraphite 1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2
CO2 1g2 ¡ Cdiamond 1s2  O2 1g2
Cgraphite 1s2 ¡ Cdiamond 1s2

¢H  394 kJ
¢H  1396 kJ2
¢H  2 kJ

Thus 2 kJ of energy is required to change 1 mol graphite to diamond. This process is
endothermic.
See Exercises 6.57 and 6.58.

(left) graphite; (right) diamond.

6.3 Hess’s Law

Sample Exercise 6.8

245

Hess’s Law II
Diborane (B2H6) is a highly reactive boron hydride that was once considered as a possible rocket fuel for the U.S. space program. Calculate H for the synthesis of diborane
from its elements, according to the equation
2B1s2  3H2 1g2 ¡ B2H6 1g2
using the following data:
H
1273 kJ
2035 kJ
286 kJ
44 kJ

Reaction
(a) 2B1s2  32 O2 1g2 ¡ B2O3 1s2
(b) B2H6 1g2  3O2 1g2 ¡ B2O3 1s2  3H2O1g2
(c) H2 1g2  12 O2 1g2 ¡ H2O1l2
(d) H2O1l2 ¡ H2O1g2
Solution

To obtain H for the required reaction, we must somehow combine equations (a), (b), (c),
and (d) to produce that reaction and add the corresponding H values. This can best be
done by focusing on the reactants and products of the required reaction. The reactants are
B(s) and H2(g), and the product is B2H6(g). How can we obtain the correct equation? Reaction (a) has B(s) as a reactant, as needed in the required equation. Thus reaction (a) will
be used as it is. Reaction (b) has B2H6(g) as a reactant, but this substance is needed as a
product. Thus reaction (b) must be reversed, and the sign of H must be changed accordingly. Up to this point we have
1a2
1b2

2B1s2  32O2 1g2 ¡ B2O3 1s2
B2O3 1s2  3H2O1g2 ¡ B2H6 1g2  3O2 1g2

Sum: B2O3 1s2  2B1s2  32O2 1g2  3H2O1g2 ¡ B2O3 1s2  B2H6 1g2  3O2 1g2

¢H  1273 kJ
¢H  12035 kJ2
¢H  762 kJ

Deleting the species that occur on both sides gives
2B1s2  3H2O1g2 ¡ B2H6 1g2  32O2 1g2

¢H  762 kJ

We are closer to the required reaction, but we still need to remove H2O(g) and O2(g) and
introduce H2(g) as a reactant. We can do this using reactions (c) and (d). If we multiply
reaction (c) and its H value by 3 and add the result to the preceding equation, we have
3  1c2

2B1s2  3H2O1g2 ¡ B2H6 1g2  32O2 1g2
33H2 1g2  12O2 1g2 ¡ H2O1l2 4

Sum: 2B1s2  3H2 1g2  32O2 1g2  3H2O1g2 ¡ B2H6 1g2  32O2 1g2  3H2O1l2

¢H  762 kJ
¢H  31286 kJ2
¢H  96 kJ

We can cancel the 32O2 1g2 on both sides, but we cannot cancel the H2O because it is gaseous
on one side and liquid on the other. This can be solved by adding reaction (d), multiplied
by 3:
2B1s2  3H2 1g2  3H2O1g2 ¡ B2H6 1g2  3H2O1l2
3  1d2
33H2O1l2 ¡ H2O1g2 4

2B1s2  3H2 1g2  3H2O1g2  3H2O1l2 ¡ B2H6 1g2  3H2O1l2  3H2O1g2

¢H  96 kJ
¢H  3144 kJ2
¢H  36 kJ

This gives the reaction required by the problem:
2B1s2  3H2 1g2 ¡ B2H6 1g2

¢H  36 kJ

Thus H for the synthesis of 1 mol diborane from the elements is 36 kJ.
See Exercises 6.59 through 6.64.

246

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

Hints for Using Hess’s Law
Calculations involving Hess’s law typically require that several reactions be manipulated
and combined to ﬁnally give the reaction of interest. In doing this procedure you should
• Work backward from the required reaction, using the reactants and products to decide
how to manipulate the other given reactions at your disposal
• Reverse any reactions as needed to give the required reactants and products
• Multiply reactions to give the correct numbers of reactants and products
This process involves some trial and error, but it can be very systematic if you always
allow the ﬁnal reaction to guide you.

6.4

Standard Enthalpies of Formation

For a reaction studied under conditions of constant pressure, we can obtain the enthalpy
change using a calorimeter. However, this process can be very difﬁcult. In fact, in some
cases it is impossible, since certain reactions do not lend themselves to such study. An example is the conversion of solid carbon from its graphite form to its diamond form:
Cgraphite 1s2 ¡ Cdiamond 1s2

The value of H for this process cannot be obtained by direct measurement in a calorimeter because the process is much too slow under normal conditions. However, as we saw
in Sample Exercise 6.7, H for this process can be calculated from heats of combustion.
This is only one example of how useful it is to be able to calculate H values for chemical reactions. We will next show how to do this using standard enthalpies of formation.
The standard enthalpy of formation ( Hf) of a compound is deﬁned as the change
in enthalpy that accompanies the formation of one mole of a compound from its elements
with all substances in their standard states.
A degree symbol on a thermodynamic function, for example, H°, indicates that the
corresponding process has been carried out under standard conditions. The standard state
for a substance is a precisely deﬁned reference state. Because thermodynamic functions
often depend on the concentrations (or pressures) of the substances involved, we must use
a common reference state to properly compare the thermodynamic properties of two substances. This is especially important because, for most thermodynamic properties, we can
measure only changes in the property. For example, we have no method for determining
absolute values of enthalpy. We can measure enthalpy changes ( H values) only by performing heat-ﬂow experiments.

Conventional Deﬁnitions of Standard States
For a Compound
Recently, the International Union of Pure
and Applied Chemists (IUPAC) has
adopted 1 bar (100,000 Pa) as the standard pressure instead of 1 atm (101,305
Pa). Both standards are now in wide use.

Standard state is not the same as the
standard temperature and pressure (STP)
for a gas (discussed in Section 5.4).

䊉

The standard state of a gaseous substance is a pressure of exactly 1 atmosphere.

䊉

For a pure substance in a condensed state (liquid or solid), the standard state is the
pure liquid or solid.

䊉

For a substance present in a solution, the standard state is a concentration of exactly
1 M.

For an Element
䊉

The standard state of an element is the form in which the element exists under conditions of 1 atmosphere and 25C. (The standard state for oxygen is O2(g) at a pressure of 1 atmosphere; the standard state for sodium is Na(s); the standard state for
mercury is Hg(l); and so on.)

6.4 Standard Enthalpies of Formation

247

Several important characteristics of the deﬁnition of the enthalpy of formation will
become clearer if we again consider the formation of nitrogen dioxide from the elements
in their standard states:
1
2 N2 1g2

 O2 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2

¢H°f  34 kJ/mol

Note that the reaction is written so that both elements are in their standard states, and 1
mole of product is formed. Enthalpies of formation are always given per mole of product
with the product in its standard state.
The formation reaction for methanol is written as
C1s2  2H2 1g2  12O2 1g2 ¡ CH3OH1l2

¢H°f  239 kJ/mol

The standard state of carbon is graphite, the standard states for oxygen and hydrogen are
the diatomic gases, and the standard state for methanol is the liquid.
The H f values for some common substances are shown in Table 6.2. More values
are found in Appendix 4. The importance of the tabulated H f values is that enthalpies
for many reactions can be calculated using these numbers. To see how this is done, we
will calculate the standard enthalpy change for the combustion of methane:
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1l2
Brown nitrogen dioxide gas.

TABLE 6.2 Standard Enthalpies
of Formation for Several
Compounds at 25⬚C
Compound
NH3(g)
NO2(g)
H2O(l)
Al2O3(s)
Fe2O3(s)
CO2(g)
CH3OH(l)
C8H18(l)

Hf (kJ/mol)
46
34
286
1676
826
394
239
269

Enthalpy is a state function, so we can invoke Hess’s law and choose any convenient pathway from reactants to products and then sum the enthalpy changes along the chosen pathway. A convenient pathway, shown in Fig. 6.8, involves taking the reactants apart to the
respective elements in their standard states in reactions (a) and (b) and then forming the
products from these elements in reactions (c) and (d). This general pathway will work for
any reaction, since atoms are conserved in a chemical reaction.
Note from Fig. 6.8 that reaction (a), where methane is taken apart into its elements,
CH4 1g2 ¡ C1s2  2H2 1g2
is just the reverse of the formation reaction for methane:
C1s2  2H2 1g2 ¡ CH4 1g2

¢H°f  75 kJ/mol

Since reversing a reaction means changing the sign of H but keeping the magnitude the
same, H for reaction (a) is  Hf, or 75 kJ. Thus H(a)  75 kJ.
Next we consider reaction (b). Here oxygen is already an element in its standard state,
so no change is needed. Thus H(b)  0.

Reactants

Elements

Products

C(s)
(a)

(c)

CH4(g)

CO2(g)
2H2(g)

FIGURE 6.8
In this pathway for the combustion of
methane, the reactants are ﬁrst taken apart
in reactions (a) and (b) to form the constituent elements in their standard states,
which are then used to assemble the products in reactions (c) and (d).

(d)
(b)
2O2(g)

2O2(g)

2H2O(l)

248

Chapter Six Thermochemistry
The next steps, reactions (c) and (d), use the elements formed in reactions (a) and (b)
to form the products. Note that reaction (c) is simply the formation reaction for carbon
dioxide:
C1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2

¢H°f  394 kJ/mol

and
¢H°1c2  ¢H°f for CO2 1g2  394 kJ
Reaction (d) is the formation reaction for water:
H2 1g2  12 O2 1g2 ¡ H2O1l2

¢H°f  286 kJ/mol

However, since 2 moles of water are required in the balanced equation, we must form
2 moles of water from the elements:
2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1l2
Thus
¢H°1d2  2  ¢H°f for H2O1l2  21286 kJ2  572 kJ
We have now completed the pathway from the reactants to the products. The change in
enthalpy for the reaction is the sum of the H values (including their signs) for the steps:
¢H°reaction
 ¢H°1a2  ¢H°1b2  ¢H°1c2  ¢H°1d2
 3¢H°f for CH4 1g2 4  0  3 ¢H°f for CO2 1g2 4  32  ¢H°f for H2O1l2 4
 175 kJ2  0  1394 kJ2  1572 kJ2
 891 kJ
This process is diagramed in Fig. 6.9. Notice that the reactants are taken apart and
converted to elements [not necessary for O2(g)] that are then used to form products. You
can see that this is a very exothermic reaction because very little energy is required to
convert the reactants to the respective elements but a great deal of energy is released when
these elements form the products. This is why this reaction is so useful for producing heat
to warm homes and ofﬁces.
Let’s examine carefully the pathway we used in this example. First, the reactants were
broken down into the elements in their standard states. This process involved reversing

Reactants

FIGURE 6.9
A schematic diagram of the energy changes
for the reaction CH4( g)  2O2(g) →
CO2(g )  2H2O(l).

Elements

Products

Step 1
(a)

Step 2
(c)

∆Ha = 75 kJ

∆Hc = –394 kJ

(b)

(d)

∆Hb = 0 kJ

∆Hd = –572 kJ

6.4 Standard Enthalpies of Formation
Subtraction means to reverse the sign
and add.

the formation reactions and thus switching the signs of the enthalpies of formation. The
products were then constructed from these elements. This involved formation reactions
and thus enthalpies of formation. We can summarize this entire process as follows: The
enthalpy change for a given reaction can be calculated by subtracting the enthalpies of
formation of the reactants from the enthalpies of formation of the products. Remember to
multiply the enthalpies of formation by integers as required by the balanced equation. This
statement can be represented symbolically as follows:
¢H°reaction  ©np ¢H°f 1products2  ©nr ¢H°f 1reactants2

Elements in their standard states are not
included in enthalpy calculations using
H f values.

249

(6.1)

where the symbol  (sigma) means “to take the sum of the terms,” and np and nr represent the moles of each product or reactant, respectively.
Elements are not included in the calculation because elements require no change in
form. We have in effect deﬁned the enthalpy of formation of an element in its standard
state as zero, since we have chosen this as our reference point for calculating enthalpy
changes in reactions.

Keep in Mind the Following Key Concepts When Doing
Enthalpy Calculations:
䊉

When a reaction is reversed, the magnitude of
changes.

H remains the same, but its sign

䊉

When the balanced equation for a reaction is multiplied by an integer, the value of
H for that reaction must be multiplied by the same integer.

䊉

The change in enthalpy for a given reaction can be calculated from the enthalpies of
formation of the reactants and products:
¢H°reaction  ©np ¢H°f 1products2  ©nr ¢H°f 1reactants2

䊉

Sample Exercise 6.9

Elements in their standard states are not included in the Hreaction calculations. That
is, Hf for an element in its standard state is zero.

Enthalpies from Standard Enthalpies of Formation I
Using the standard enthalpies of formation listed in Table 6.2, calculate the standard enthalpy change for the overall reaction that occurs when ammonia is burned in air to form
nitrogen dioxide and water. This is the ﬁrst step in the manufacture of nitric acid.
4NH3 1g2  7O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO2 1g2  6H2O1l2
Solution
We will use the pathway in which the reactants are broken down into elements in their
standard states, which are then used to form the products (see Fig. 6.10).

➥1

Decomposition of NH3(g) into elements (reaction (a) in Fig. 6.10). The ﬁrst step is
to decompose 4 moles of NH3 into N2 and H2:
4NH3 1g2 ¡ 2N2 1g2  6H2 1g2

The preceding reaction is 4 times the reverse of the formation reaction for NH3:
1
2 N2 1g2

 32H2 1g2 ¡ NH3 1g2

¢H°f  46 kJ/mol

Thus
¢H°1a2  4 mol 3146 kJ/mol2 4  184 kJ

250

Chapter Six Thermochemistry
Reactants

Elements

Products

2N2(g)
(a)

(c)

4NH3(g)

4NO2(g)
6H2(g)
(d)

6H2O(l)

(b)
7O2(g)

7O2(g)

FIGURE 6.10
A pathway for the combustion of ammonia.

➥2

Elemental oxygen (reaction (b) in Fig. 6.10). Since O2(g) is an element in its standard state, H(b)  0.
We now have the elements N2(g), H2(g), and O2(g), which can be combined to form
the products of the overall reaction.

➥3

Synthesis of NO2(g) from elements (reaction (c) in Fig. 6.10). The overall reaction
equation has 4 moles of NO2. Thus the required reaction is 4 times the formation reaction
for NO2:
4  3 12N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2 4
and
¢H°1c2  4  ¢H°f for NO2 1g2
From Table 6.2, H f for NO2(g)  34 kJ/mol and
¢H°1c2  4 mol  34 kJ/mol  136 kJ

➥ 4 Synthesis of H2O(l) from elements (reaction (d) in Fig. 6.10). Since the overall
equation for the reaction has 6 moles of H2O(l), the required reaction is 6 times the formation reaction for H2O(l):
6  3H2 1g2  12O2 1g2 ¡ H2O1l2 4
and
¢H°1d2  6  ¢H°f for H2O1l2
From Table 6.2, Hf for H2O(l)  286 kJ/mol and
¢H°1d2  6 mol 1286 kJ/mol2  1716 kJ
To summarize, we have done the following:

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

(a)
4NH3 1g2 88888n

H(c)
⎧ 2N2 1g2  6H2 1g2 88888n
4NO2 1g2
⎪
H(b) ⎨
H(d)
⎪ 7O2 1g2
7O2 1g2 88888n
6H2O1l2
88888n
⎩
H

Elements in their
standard states

6.4 Standard Enthalpies of Formation

251

We add the H values for the steps to get H for the overall reaction:
¢H°reaction  ¢H°1a2  ¢H°1b2  ¢H°1c2  ¢H°1d2
 34  ¢H°f for NH3 1g2 4  0  34  ¢H°f for NO2 1g2 4
 36  ¢H°f for H2O1l2 4
 34  ¢H°f for NO2 1g2 4  36  ¢H°f for H2O1l2 4
 34  ¢H°f for NH3 1g2 4
 ©np ¢H°f 1products2  ©nr ¢H°f 1reactants2
Remember that elemental reactants and products do not need to be included, since
H f for an element in its standard state is zero. Note that we have again obtained Equation (6.1). The ﬁnal solution is
¢H°reaction  34  134 kJ2 4  36  1286 kJ2 4  34  146 kJ2 4
 1396 kJ
See Exercises 6.67 and 6.68.
Now that we have shown the basis for Equation (6.1), we will make direct use of it
to calculate H for reactions in succeeding exercises.

Sample Exercise 6.10
Visualization: Thermite
Reaction

Enthalpies from Standard Enthalpies of Formation II
Using enthalpies of formation, calculate the standard change in enthalpy for the thermite
reaction:
2Al1s2  Fe2O3 1s2 ¡ Al2O3 1s2  2Fe1s2
This reaction occurs when a mixture of powdered aluminum and iron(III) oxide is ignited
with a magnesium fuse.
Solution
We use Equation (6.1):
¢H°  ©np ¢H°f 1products2  ©nr ¢H°f 1reactants2
where
¢H°f for Fe2O3 1s2  826 kJ/mol
¢H°f for Al2O3 1s2  1676 kJ/mol
¢H°f for Al1s2  ¢H°f for Fe1s2  0
Thus
¢H°reaction  ¢H°f for Al2O3 1s2  ¢H°f for Fe2O3 1s2
 1676 kJ  1826 kJ2  850. kJ
This reaction is so highly exothermic that the iron produced is initially molten. This process
is often used as a lecture demonstration and also has been used in welding massive steel
objects such as ships’ propellers.

The thermite reaction is one of the most
energetic chemical reactions known.

See Exercises 6.71 and 6.72.

252

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

Sample Exercise 6.11

Enthalpies from Standard Enthalpies of Formation III
Methanol (CH3OH) is often used as a fuel in high-performance engines in race cars. Using the data in Table 6.2, compare the standard enthalpy of combustion per gram of
methanol with that per gram of gasoline. Gasoline is actually a mixture of compounds,
but assume for this problem that gasoline is pure liquid octane (C8H18).
Solution
The combustion reaction for methanol is
2CH3OH1l2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  4H2O1l2
Using the standard enthalpies of formation from Table 6.2 and Equation (6.1), we have
¢H°reaction  2  ¢H°f for CO2 1g2  4  ¢H°f for H2O1l2 
2  ¢H°f for CH3OH1l2
 2  1394 kJ2  4  1286 kJ2  2  1239 kJ2
 1454 kJ
Thus 1454 kJ of heat is evolved when 2 moles of methanol burn. The molar mass of
methanol is 32.0 g/mol. This means that 1454 kJ of energy is produced when 64.0 g
methanol burns. The enthalpy of combustion per gram of methanol is
1454 kJ
 22.7 kJ/g
64.0 g
The combustion reaction for octane is
2C8H18 1l2  25O2 1g2 ¡ 16CO2 1g2  18H2O1l2
Using the standard enthalpies of information from Table 6.2 and Equation (6.1), we have
¢H°reaction  16  ¢H°f for CO2 1g2  18  ¢H°f for H2O1l2 
2  ¢H°f for C8H18 1l2
 16  1394 kJ2  18  1286 kJ2  2  1269 kJ2
 1.09  104 kJ
This is the amount of heat evolved when 2 moles of octane burn. Since the molar mass
of octane is 114.2 g/mol, the enthalpy of combustion per gram of octane is
1.09  104 kJ
 47.8 kJ/g
21114.2 g2
The enthalpy of combustion per gram of octane is approximately twice that per gram
of methanol. On this basis, gasoline appears to be superior to methanol for use in a racing car, where weight considerations are usually very important. Why, then, is methanol
used in racing cars? The answer is that methanol burns much more smoothly than gasoline in high-performance engines, and this advantage more than compensates for its weight
disadvantage.
See Exercise 6.77.

6.5

Present Sources of Energy

Woody plants, coal, petroleum, and natural gas hold a vast amount of energy that originally
came from the sun. By the process of photosynthesis, plants store energy that can be
claimed by burning the plants themselves or the decay products that have been converted

6.5 Present Sources of Energy

253

91%
73%

71%

62%
52%
36%
21%
9%
1850

FIGURE 6.11
Energy sources used in the United States.

Wood

23%

18%
5% 3%
1900
Coal

6%

6%
1950

6%

3%
1975

Petroleum/natural gas

11%
4%
2000
Hydro and nuclear

over millions of years to fossil fuels. Although the United States currently depends heavily on petroleum for energy, this dependency is a relatively recent phenomenon, as shown
in Fig. 6.11. In this section we discuss some sources of energy and their effects on the
environment.

Petroleum and Natural Gas

This oil rig in Norway is the largest in the
world.

TABLE 6.3 Names and
Formulas for Some Common
Hydrocarbons
Formula

Name

CH4
C 2 H6
C 3 H8
C4H10
C5H12
C6H14
C7H16
C8H18

Methane
Ethane
Propane
Butane
Pentane
Hexane
Heptane
Octane

Although how they were produced is not completely understood, petroleum and natural
gas were most likely formed from the remains of marine organisms that lived approximately 500 million years ago. Petroleum is a thick, dark liquid composed mostly of compounds called hydrocarbons that contain carbon and hydrogen. (Carbon is unique among
elements in the extent to which it can bond to itself to form chains of various lengths.)
Table 6.3 gives the formulas and names for several common hydrocarbons. Natural gas,
usually associated with petroleum deposits, consists mostly of methane, but it also contains signiﬁcant amounts of ethane, propane, and butane.
The composition of petroleum varies somewhat, but it consists mostly of hydrocarbons having chains that contain from 5 to more than 25 carbons. To be used efﬁciently,
the petroleum must be separated into fractions by boiling. The lighter molecules (having
the lowest boiling points) can be boiled off, leaving the heavier ones behind. The commercial uses of various petroleum fractions are shown in Table 6.4.
The petroleum era began when the demand for lamp oil during the Industrial
Revolution outstripped the traditional sources: animal fats and whale oil. In response to
this increased demand, Edwin Drake drilled the ﬁrst oil well in 1859 at Titusville,
Pennsylvania. The petroleum from this well was reﬁned to produce kerosene (fraction
C10–C18), which served as an excellent lamp oil. Gasoline (fraction C5–C10) had limited
use and was often discarded. However, this situation soon changed. The development of
the electric light decreased the need for kerosene, and the advent of the “horseless carriage”
with its gasoline-powered engine signaled the birth of the gasoline age.
As gasoline became more important, new ways were sought to increase the yield of
gasoline obtained from each barrel of petroleum. William Burton invented a process at
Standard Oil of Indiana called pyrolytic (high-temperature) cracking. In this process, the
heavier molecules of the kerosene fraction are heated to about 700C, causing them to
break (crack) into the smaller molecules of hydrocarbons in the gasoline fraction. As cars
became larger, more efﬁcient internal combustion engines were designed. Because of the
uneven burning of the gasoline then available, these engines “knocked,” producing
unwanted noise and even engine damage. Intensive research to ﬁnd additives that would
promote smoother burning produced tetraethyl lead, (C2H5)4Pb, a very effective “antiknock” agent.

254

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

TABLE 6.4 Uses of the Various
Petroleum Fractions
Petroleum Fraction
in Terms of Numbers
of Carbon Atoms
C5–C10
C10–C18
C15–C25

C25

Major Uses
Gasoline
Kerosene
Jet fuel
Diesel fuel
Heating oil
Lubricating
oil
Asphalt

Coal has variable composition depending
on both its age and location.

The addition of tetraethyl lead to gasoline became a common practice, and by 1960,
gasoline contained as much as 3 grams of lead per gallon. As we have discovered so often in recent years, technological advances can produce environmental problems. To prevent air pollution from automobile exhaust, catalytic converters have been added to car
exhaust systems. The effectiveness of these converters, however, is destroyed by lead. The
use of leaded gasoline also greatly increased the amount of lead in the environment, where
it can be ingested by animals and humans. For these reasons, the use of lead in gasoline
has been phased out, requiring extensive (and expensive) modiﬁcations of engines and of
the gasoline reﬁning process.

Coal
Coal was formed from the remains of plants that were buried and subjected to high pressure and heat over long periods of time. Plant materials have a high content of cellulose,
a complex molecule whose empirical formula is CH2O but whose molar mass is around
500,000 g/mol. After the plants and trees that ﬂourished on the earth at various times and
places died and were buried, chemical changes gradually lowered the oxygen and hydrogen content of the cellulose molecules. Coal “matures” through four stages: lignite, subbituminous, bituminous, and anthracite. Each stage has a higher carbon-to-oxygen and
carbon-to-hydrogen ratio; that is, the relative carbon content gradually increases. Typical
elemental compositions of the various coals are given in Table 6.5. The energy available
from the combustion of a given mass of coal increases as the carbon content increases.
Therefore, anthracite is the most valuable coal, and lignite the least valuable.
Coal is an important and plentiful fuel in the United States, currently furnishing approximately 23% of our energy. As the supply of petroleum dwindles, the share of the energy supply from coal is expected to increase. However, coal is expensive and dangerous
to mine underground, and the strip mining of fertile farmland in the Midwest or of scenic
land in the West causes obvious problems. In addition, the burning of coal, especially
high-sulfur coal, yields air pollutants such as sulfur dioxide, which, in turn, can lead to
acid rain, as we learned in Chapter 5. However, even if coal were pure carbon, the carbon dioxide produced when it was burned would still have signiﬁcant effects on the earth’s
climate.

Effects of Carbon Dioxide on Climate

The electromagnetic spectrum, including
visible and infrared radiation, is discussed in Chapter 7.

The earth receives a tremendous quantity of radiant energy from the sun, about 30% of
which is reﬂected back into space by the earth’s atmosphere. The remaining energy passes
through the atmosphere to the earth’s surface. Some of this energy is absorbed by plants
for photosynthesis and some by the oceans to evaporate water, but most of it is absorbed
by soil, rocks, and water, increasing the temperature of the earth’s surface. This energy is
in turn radiated from the heated surface mainly as infrared radiation, often called heat
radiation.

TABLE 6.5

Elemental Composition of Various Types of Coal
Mass Percent of Each Element

Type of Coal

C

H

O

N

S

Lignite
Subbituminous
Bituminous
Anthracite

71
77
80
92

4
5
6
3

23
16
8
3

1
1
1
1

1
1
5
1

6.5 Present Sources of Energy
Visible light
from the sun
CO2 and
H2O
molecules

Infrared
radiated by
the earth

Earth

Earth’s
atmosphere

FIGURE 6.12
The earth’s atmosphere is transparent to
visible light from the sun. This visible light
strikes the earth, and part of it is changed
to infrared radiation. The infrared radiation
from the earth’s surface is strongly absorbed by CO2, H2O, and other molecules
present in smaller amounts (for example,
CH4 and N2O) in the atmosphere. In effect,
the atmosphere traps some of the energy,
acting like the glass in a greenhouse and
keeping the earth warmer than it would
otherwise be.

The average temperature of the earth’s
surface is 298 K. It would be 255 K
without the “greenhouse gases.”

Sheep grazing on a ranch in Australia.

255

The atmosphere, like window glass, is transparent to visible light but does not allow
all the infrared radiation to pass back into space. Molecules in the atmosphere, principally
H2O and CO2, strongly absorb infrared radiation and radiate it back toward the earth, as
shown in Fig. 6.12, so a net amount of thermal energy is retained by the earth’s atmosphere, causing the earth to be much warmer than it would be without its atmosphere. In
a way, the atmosphere acts like the glass of a greenhouse, which is transparent to visible
light but absorbs infrared radiation, thus raising the temperature inside the building. This
greenhouse effect is seen even more spectacularly on Venus, where the dense atmosphere
is thought to be responsible for the high surface temperature of that planet.
Thus the temperature of the earth’s surface is controlled to a signiﬁcant extent by the
carbon dioxide and water content of the atmosphere. The effect of atmospheric moisture
(humidity) is apparent in the Midwest. In summer, when the humidity is high, the heat of
the sun is retained well into the night, giving very high nighttime temperatures. On the
other hand, in winter, the coldest temperatures always occur on clear nights, when the low
humidity allows efﬁcient radiation of energy back into space.
The atmosphere’s water content is controlled by the water cycle (evaporation and precipitation), and the average remains constant over the years. However, as fossil fuels have
been used more extensively, the carbon dioxide concentration has increased by about 16%
from 1880 to 1980. Comparisons of satellite data have now produced evidence that the
greenhouse effect has signiﬁcantly warmed the earth’s atmosphere. The data compare the
same areas in both 1979 and 1997. The analysis shows that more infrared radiation was
blocked by CO2, methane, and other greenhouse gases. This could increase the earth’s average temperature by as much as 3C, causing dramatic changes in climate and greatly
affecting the growth of food crops.
How well can we predict long-term effects? Because weather has been studied for a
period of time that is minuscule compared with the age of the earth, the factors that control the earth’s climate in the long range are not clearly understood. For example, we do
not understand what causes the earth’s periodic ice ages. So it is difﬁcult to estimate the
impact of the increasing carbon dioxide levels.
In fact, the variation in the earth’s average temperature over the past century is somewhat confusing. In the northern latitudes during the past century, the average temperature
rose by 0.8C over a period of 60 years, then cooled by 0.5C during the next 25 years,
and ﬁnally warmed by 0.2C in the succeeding 15 years. Such ﬂuctuations do not match
the steady increase in carbon dioxide. However, in southern latitudes and near the equator during the past century, the average temperature showed a steady rise totaling 0.4C.

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

500
400
Global CO2

200

2000

1950

1900

1800

Global temperature
1850

300

1750

CO2 concentration (ppmv)

256

Year (A.D.)

FIGURE 6.13
The atmospheric CO2 concentration and the
average global temperature over the last
250 years. Note the signiﬁcant increase in
CO2 concentration in the last 50 years.
(Source: National Assessment Synthesis Team, Climate
Change Impacts on the United States: The Potential
Consequences of Climate, Variability and Change,
Overview, Report for the U.S. Global Change Research
Program, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, p. 13, 2000.)

This ﬁgure is in reasonable agreement with the predicted effect of the increasing carbon
dioxide concentration over that period. Another signiﬁcant fact is that the past 10 years
constitute the warmest decade on record.
Although the exact relationship between the carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere and the earth’s temperature is not known at present, one thing is clear: The increase in the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide is quite dramatic (see Fig. 6.13).
We must consider the implications of this increase as we consider our future energy needs.
Methane is another greenhouse gas that is 21 times more potent than carbon dioxide.
This fact is particularly signiﬁcant for countries with lots of animals, because methane is
produced by methanogenic archae that live in the animals’ rumen. For example, sheep and
cattle produce about 14% of Australia’s total greenhouse emissions. To reduce this level,
Australia has initiated a program to vaccinate sheep and cattle to lower the number of archae present in their digestive systems. It is hoped that this effort will reduce by 20% the
amount of methane emitted by these animals.

6.6

New Energy Sources

As we search for the energy sources of the future, we need to consider economic, climatic,
and supply factors. There are several potential energy sources: the sun (solar), nuclear
processes (ﬁssion and fusion), biomass (plants), and synthetic fuels. Direct use of the sun’s
radiant energy to heat our homes and run our factories and transportation systems seems
a sensible long-term goal. But what do we do now? Conservation of fossil fuels is one
obvious step, but substitutes for fossil fuels also must be found. We will discuss some
alternative sources of energy here. Nuclear power will be considered in Chapter 21.

Coal Conversion
One alternative energy source involves using a traditional fuel—coal—in new ways. Since
transportation costs for solid coal are high, more energy-efﬁcient fuels are being developed from coal. One possibility is to produce a gaseous fuel. Substances like coal that
contain large molecules have high boiling points and tend to be solids or thick liquids. To
convert coal from a solid to a gas therefore requires reducing the size of the molecules;
the coal structure must be broken down in a process called coal gasiﬁcation. This is done
by treating the coal with oxygen and steam at high temperatures to break many of the
carbon–carbon bonds. These bonds are replaced by carbon–hydrogen and carbon–oxygen
bonds as the coal fragments react with the water and oxygen. The process is represented
in Fig. 6.14. The desired product is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen called
synthetic gas, or syngas, and methane (CH4) gas. Since all the components of this product can react with oxygen to release heat in a combustion reaction, this gas is a useful
fuel.
One of the most important considerations in designing an industrial process is efﬁcient
use of energy. In coal gasiﬁcation, some of the reactions are exothermic:
C1s2  2H2 1g2 ¡ CH4 1g2
C1s2  12O2 1g2 ¡ CO1g2
C1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2

¢H°  75 kJ
¢H°  111 kJ
¢H°  394 kJ

Other gasiﬁcation reactions are endothermic, for example:
C1s2  H2O1g2 ¡ H2 1g2  CO1g2
An industrial process must be energy
efﬁcient.

¢H°  131 kJ

If such conditions as the rate of feed of coal, air, and steam are carefully controlled, the
correct temperature can be maintained in the process without using any external energy
source. That is, an energy balance is maintained.

6.6 New Energy Sources

257

Coal (C)
+ steam [H2O(g)]
+ air [O2(g)]
Heat
CH4(g), CO(g), CO2(g), H2(g), H2O(g)
+ sulfur-containing impurities
(sulfur compounds)
Separate

CO(g) + H2O(g)
CO(g) + 3H2(g)

FIGURE 6.14
Coal gasiﬁcation. Reaction of coal with a
mixture of steam and air breaks down the
large hydrocarbon molecules in the coal to
smaller gaseous molecules, which can be
used as fuels.

CO2(g) + H2(g)
CH4(g) + H2O(g)

CH4(g)

CH4(g)
Syngas [CO(g), H2(g)]

Remove CO2,
H2O, impurities

Presently only a few plants in the United States use syngas produced on site to produce
electricity. These plants are being used to evaluate the economic feasibility of producing
electrical power by coal gasiﬁcation.
Although syngas can be used directly as a fuel, it is also important as a raw material to produce other fuels. For example, syngas can be converted directly to methanol:
CO1g2  2H2 1g2 ¡ CH3OH1l2
Methanol is used in the production of synthetic ﬁbers and plastics and also can be used
as a fuel. In addition, it can be converted directly to gasoline. Approximately half of South
Africa’s gasoline supply comes from methanol produced from syngas.
In addition to coal gasiﬁcation, the formation of coal slurries is another new use of
coal. A slurry is a suspension of ﬁne particles in a liquid, and coal must be pulverized and
mixed with water to form a slurry. The slurry can be handled, stored, and burned in ways
similar to those used for residual oil, a heavy fuel oil from petroleum accounting for almost 15% of U.S. petroleum imports. One hope is that coal slurries might replace solid
coal and residual oil as fuels for electricity-generating power plants. However, the water
needed for slurries might place an unacceptable burden on water resources, especially in
the western states.

Hydrogen as a Fuel
If you have ever seen a lecture demonstration where hydrogen–oxygen mixtures were ignited, you have witnessed a demonstration of hydrogen’s potential as a fuel. The combustion reaction is
H2 1g2  12 O2 1g2 ¡ H2O1l2

The main engines in the space shuttle
Endeavour use hydrogen and oxygen
as fuel.

¢H°  286 kJ

As we saw in Sample Exercise 6.6, the heat of combustion of H2(g) per gram is approximately 2.5 times that of natural gas. In addition, hydrogen has a real advantage over fossil
fuels in that the only product of hydrogen combustion is water; fossil fuels also produce
carbon dioxide. However, even though it appears that hydrogen is a very logical choice
as a major fuel for the future, there are three main problems: the cost of production,
storage, and transport.

258

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Farming the Wind
n the Midwest the wind blows across ﬁelds of corn, soybeans, wheat, and wind turbines—wind turbines? It turns
out that the wind that seems to blow almost continuously
across the plains is now becoming the latest cash crop. One
of these new-breed wind farmers is Daniel Juhl, who recently erected 17 wind turbines on six acres of land near
Woodstock, Minnesota. These turbines can generate as much
as 10 megawatts (MW) of electricity, which Juhl sells to the
local electrical utility.
There is plenty of untapped wind-power in the United
States. Wind mappers rate regions on a scale of 1 to 6 (with
6 being the best) to indicate the quality of the wind resource.
Wind farms are now being developed in areas rated from 4
to 6. The farmers who own the land welcome the increased
income derived from the wind blowing across their land.
Economists estimate that each acre devoted to wind turbines

I

can pay royalties to the farmers of as much as $8000 per
year, or many times the revenue from growing corn on that
same land. Daniel Juhl claims that farmers who construct
the turbines themselves can realize as much as $20,000 per
year per turbine. Globally, wind generation of electricity has
nearly quadrupled in the last ﬁve years and is expected to
increase by about 60% per year in the United States. The
economic feasibility of wind-generated electricity has greatly
improved in the last 30 years as the wind turbines have
become more efﬁcient. Today’s turbines can produce electricity that costs about the same as that from other sources.
The most impressive thing about wind power is the magnitude of the supply. According to the American Wind Energy
Association in Washington, D.C., the wind-power potential
in the United States is comparable or larger than the energy
resources under the sands of Saudi Arabia.

First let’s look at the production problem. Although hydrogen is very abundant on
earth, virtually none of it exists as the free gas. Currently, the main source of hydrogen
gas is from the treatment of natural gas with steam:
CH4 1g2  H2O1g2 ¡ 3H2 1g2  CO1g2
We can calculate H for this reaction using Equation (6.1):
¢H°  ©np ¢H°f 1products2  ©nr ¢H°f 1reactants2
 ¢H°f for CO1g2  ¢H°f for CH4 1g2  ¢H°f for H2O1g2
 111 kJ  175 kJ2  1242 kJ2  206 kJ
Note that this reaction is highly endothermic; treating methane with steam is not an efﬁcient
way to obtain hydrogen for fuel. It would be much more economical to burn the methane
directly.
A virtually inexhaustible supply of hydrogen exists in the waters of the world’s oceans.
However, the reaction
H2O1l2 ¡ H2 1g2  12O2 1g2

Electrolysis will be discussed in
Chapter 17.

requires 286 kJ of energy per mole of liquid water, and under current circumstances, largescale production of hydrogen from water is not economically feasible. However, several
methods for such production are currently being studied: electrolysis of water, thermal decomposition of water, thermochemical decomposition of water, and biological decomposition of water.
Electrolysis of water involves passing an electric current through it, as shown in
Fig. 1.16 in Chapter 1. The present cost of electricity makes the hydrogen produced by
electrolysis too expensive to be competitive as a fuel. However, if in the future we develop
more efﬁcient sources of electricity, this situation could change.
Recent research at the University of Minnesota by Lanny Schmidt and his coworkers suggests that corn could be a feasible source of hydrogen. In this process the starch
from the corn is fermented to produce alcohol, which is then decomposed in a special

6.6 New Energy Sources

The biggest hurdle that must be overcome before wind
power can become a signiﬁcant electricity producer in the
United States is construction of the transmission infrastructure—the power lines needed to move the electricity from
the rural areas to the cities where most of the power is used.
For example, the hundreds of turbines planned in southwest
Minnesota in a development called Buffalo Ridge could supply enough electricity to power 1 million homes if transmission problems can be solved.
Another possible scenario for wind farms is to use the
electrical power generated to decompose water to produce
hydrogen gas that could be carried to cities by pipelines and
used as a fuel. One real beneﬁt of hydrogen is that it produces water as its only combustion product. Thus, it is
essentially pollution-free.
Within a few years wind power could be a major
source of electricity. There could be a fresh wind blowing
across the energy landscape of the United States in the
near future.

259

This State Line Wind Project along the Oregon-Washington border
uses approximately 399 wind turbines to create enough electricity to
power some 70,000 households.

reactor at 140C with a rhodium and cerium oxide catalyst to give hydrogen. These scientists indicate that enough hydrogen gas can be obtained from a few ounces of ethanol
to generate electricity to run six 60-watt bulbs for an hour.
Thermal decomposition is another method for producing hydrogen from water. This
involves heating the water to several thousand degrees, where it spontaneously decomposes into hydrogen and oxygen. However, attaining temperatures in this range would
be very expensive even if a practical heat source and a suitable reaction container were
available.
In the thermochemical decomposition of water, chemical reactions, as well as heat,
are used to “split” water into its components. One such system involves the following reactions (the temperature required for each is given in parentheses):
2HI ¡ I2  H2
2H2O  SO2  I2 ¡ H2SO4  2HI
H2SO4 ¡ SO2  H2O  12 O2

1425°C2
190°C2
1825°C2

Net reaction: H2O ¡ H2  12 O2
Note that the HI is not consumed in the net reaction. Note also that the maximum temperature required is 825C, a temperature that is feasible if a nuclear reactor is used as a
heat source. A current research goal is to ﬁnd a system for which the required temperatures are low enough that sunlight can be used as the energy source.
But what about the organisms that decompose water without the aid of electricity or
high temperatures? In the process of photosynthesis, green plants absorb carbon dioxide
and water and use them along with energy from the sun to produce the substances needed
for growth. Scientists have studied photosynthesis for years, hoping to get answers to humanity’s food and energy shortages. At present, much of this research involves attempts
to modify the photosynthetic process so that plants will release hydrogen gas from water
instead of using the hydrogen to produce complex compounds. Small-scale experiments
have shown that under certain conditions plants do produce hydrogen gas, but the yields

260

Chapter Six Thermochemistry
are far from being commercially useful. At this point the economical production of
hydrogen gas remains unrealized.
The storage and transportation of hydrogen also present problems. First, on metal
surfaces the H2 molecule decomposes to atoms. Since the atoms are so small, they can
migrate into the metal, causing structural changes that make it brittle. This might lead to
a pipeline failure if hydrogen were pumped under high pressure.
An additional problem is the relatively small amount of energy that is available per
unit volume of hydrogen gas. Although the energy available per gram of hydrogen is
signiﬁcantly greater than that per gram of methane, the energy available per given volume
of hydrogen is about one-third that available from the same volume of methane. This is
demonstrated in Sample Exercise 6.12.
Although the use of hydrogen as a fuel solves some of the problems associated with
fossil fuels, it does present some potential environmental problems of its own. Studies by
John M. Eiler and his colleagues at California Institute of Technology indicate that, if
hydrogen becomes a major source of energy, accidental leakage of the gas into the
atmosphere could pose a threat. The Cal Tech scientists calculate that leakage could raise
the concentration of H2 in the atmosphere from its natural level of 0.5 part per million to
more than 2 parts per million. As some of the H2 eventually ﬁnds its way into the upper
atmosphere, it would react with O2 to form water, which would increase the number of
ice crystals. This could lead to the destruction of some of the protective ozone because
many of the chemical reactions that destroy ozone occur on the surfaces of ice crystals.
However, as is the usual case with environmental issues, the situation is complicated. The
scenario suggested by Eiler’s team may not happen because the leaked H2 could be consumed by soil microbes that use hydrogen as a nutrient. In fact, Eiler’s studies show that
90% of the H2 emitted into the atmosphere today from sources such as motor vehicles
and forest ﬁres is eventually absorbed by soil organisms.
The evaluation of hydrogen as a fuel illustrates how complex and interconnected the
economic and environmental issues are.
Sample Exercise 6.12

Enthalpies of Combustion
Compare the energy available from the combustion of a given volume of methane and the
same volume of hydrogen at the same temperature and pressure.
Solution
In Sample Exercise 6.6 we calculated the heat released for the combustion of methane
and hydrogen: 55 kJ/g CH4 and 141 kJ/g H2. We also know from our study of gases that
1 mol H2(g) has the same volume as 1 mol CH4(g) at the same temperature and pressure
(assuming ideal behavior). Thus, for molar volumes of both gases under the same conditions of temperature and pressure,
Enthalpy of combustion of 1 molar volume of H2 1g2
Enthalpy of combustion of 1 molar volume of CH4 1g2
enthalpy of combustion per mole of H2
enthalpy of combustion per mole of CH4
1141 kJ/g212.02 g H2/mol H2 2

155 kJ/g2116.04 g CH4/mol CH4 2
1
285


882
3



Thus about three times the volume of hydrogen gas is needed to furnish the same energy
as a given volume of methane.
See Exercise 6.78.

6.6 New Energy Sources

261

Could hydrogen be considered as a potential fuel for automobiles? This is an intriguing question. The internal combustion engines in automobiles can be easily adapted
to burn hydrogen. In fact, BMW is now experimenting with a ﬂeet of cars powered by
hydrogen-burning internal combustion engines. However, the primary difﬁculty is the storage of enough hydrogen to give an automobile a reasonable range. This is illustrated by
Sample Exercise 6.13.

Sample Exercise 6.13

Comparing Enthalpies of Combustion
Assuming that the combustion of hydrogen gas provides three times as much energy per
gram as gasoline, calculate the volume of liquid H2 (density  0.0710 g/mL) required to
furnish the energy contained in 80.0 L (about 20 gal) of gasoline (density  0.740 g/mL).
Calculate also the volume that this hydrogen would occupy as a gas at 1.00 atm and 25C.
Solution
The mass of 80.0 L gasoline is
80.0 L 

0.740 g
1000 mL

 59,200 g
1L
mL

Since H2 furnishes three times as much energy per gram as gasoline, only a third as much
liquid hydrogen is needed to furnish the same energy:
Mass of H2 1l2 needed 

59,200 g
 19,700 g
3

Since density  massvolume, then volume  massdensity, and the volume of H2(l)
needed is
19,700 g
0.0710 g/mL
 2.77  105 mL  277 L

V

Thus 277 L of liquid H2 is needed to furnish the same energy of combustion as 80.0 L of
gasoline.
To calculate the volume that this hydrogen would occupy as a gas at 1.00 atm and
25C, we use the ideal gas law:
PV  nRT
In this case
P  1.00 atm, T  273  25C  298 K, and R  0.08206 L  atm/K  mol.
Also,
n  19,700 g H2 

1 mol H2
 9.75  103 mol H2
2.02 g H2

Thus
V

19.75  103 mol210.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2
nRT

P
1.00 atm
5
 2.38  10 L  238,000 L

At 1 atm and 25C, the hydrogen gas needed to replace 20 gal of gasoline occupies a volume of 238,000 L.
See Exercises 6.79 and 6.80.

262

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Veggie Gasoline?
asoline usage is as high as ever, and
world petroleum supplies will eventually dwindle. One possible alternative
to petroleum as a source of fuels and
lubricants is vegetable oil—the same
vegetable oil we now use to cook french
fries. Researchers believe that the oils
from soybeans, corn, canola, and sunﬂowers all have the potential to be used
in cars as well as on salads.
The use of vegetable oil for fuel is
not a new idea. Rudolf Diesel reportedly
used peanut oil to run one of his engines
at the Paris Exposition in 1900. In addition, ethyl alcohol has been used widely
as a fuel in South America and as a fuel
additive in the United States.

G

Metal hydrides are discussed in
Chapter 18.

This promotion bus both advertises biodiesel and demonstrates its usefulness

You can see from Sample Exercise 6.13 that an automobile would need a huge tank
to hold enough hydrogen gas (at 1 atm) to have a typical mileage range. Clearly, hydrogen must be stored as a liquid or in some other way. Is this feasible? Because of its very
low boiling point (20 K), storage of liquid hydrogen requires a superinsulated container
that can withstand high pressures. Storage in this manner would be both expensive and
hazardous because of the potential for explosion. Thus storage of hydrogen in the individual automobile as a liquid does not seem practical.
A much better alternative seems to be the use of metals that absorb hydrogen to form
solid metal hydrides:
H2 1g2  M1s2 ¡ MH2 1s2
To use this method of storage, hydrogen gas would be pumped into a tank containing the
solid metal in powdered form, where it would be absorbed to form the hydride, whose
volume would be little more than that of the metal alone. This hydrogen would then be
available for combustion in the engine by release of H2(g) from the hydride as needed:
MH2 1s2 ¡ M1s2  H2 1g2

Several types of solids that absorb hydrogen to form hydrides are being studied for use
in hydrogen-powered vehicles. The most likely use of hydrogen in automobiles will be to
power fuel cells (see Section 17.5). Ford, Honda, and Toyota are all experimenting with
cars powered by hydrogen fuel cells.

Other Energy Alternatives
Many other energy sources are being considered for future use. The western states, especially Colorado, contain huge deposits of oil shale, which consists of a complex carbonbased material called kerogen contained in porous rock formations. These deposits have
the potential of being a larger energy source than the vast petroleum deposits of the Middle East. The main problem with oil shale is that the trapped fuel is not ﬂuid and cannot

6.6 New Energy Sources

Biodiesel, a fuel made by esterifying the fatty acids
found in vegetable oil, has some real advantages over regular diesel fuel. Biodiesel produces fewer pollutants such
as particulates, carbon monoxide, and complex organic
molecules, and since vegetable oils have no sulfur, there
is no noxious sulfur dioxide in the exhaust gases. Also,
biodiesel can run in existing engines with little modiﬁcation. In addition, biodiesel is much more biodegradable
than petroleum-based fuels, so spills cause less environmental damage.
Of course, biodiesel also has some serious drawbacks.
The main one is that it costs about three times as much as
regular diesel fuel. Biodiesel also produces more nitrogen
oxides in the exhaust than conventional diesel fuel and
is less stable in storage. Biodiesel also can leave more
gummy deposits in engines and must be “winterized”
by removing components that tend to solidify at low
temperatures.
The best solution may be to use biodiesel as an additive to regular diesel fuel. One such fuel is known as B20
because it is 20% biodiesel and 80% conventional diesel

The sugars in corn are fermented and used
to produce ethanol, an additive for
gasoline.

263

fuel. B20 is especially attractive because of the higher lubricating ability of vegetable oils, thus reducing diesel engine wear.
Vegetable oils are also being looked at as replacements
for motor oils and hydraulic ﬂuids. Tests of a sunﬂower
seed–based engine lubricant manufactured by Renewable
Lubricants of Hartville, Ohio, have shown satisfactory lubricating ability while lowering particle emissions. In addition, Lou Honary and his colleagues at the University of
Northern Iowa have developed BioSOY, a vegetable
oil–based hydraulic ﬂuid for use in heavy machinery.
Veggie oil fuels and lubricants seem to have a growing
market as petroleum supplies wane and as environmental
laws become more stringent. In Germany’s Black Forest region, for example, environmental protection laws require
that farm equipment use only vegetable oil fuels and lubricants. In the near future there may be veggie oil in your
garage as well as in your kitchen.
Adapted from “Fill ’Er Up . . . with Veggie Oil,” by Corinna Wu,
as appeared in Science News, Vol. 154, December 5, 1998, p. 364.

be pumped. To recover the fuel, the rock must be heated to a temperature of 250C or
higher to decompose the kerogen to smaller molecules that produce gaseous and liquid
products. This process is expensive and yields large quantities of waste rock, which have
a negative environmental impact.
Ethanol (C2H5OH) is another fuel with the potential to supplement, if not replace,
gasoline. The most common method of producing ethanol is fermentation, a process in
which sugar is changed to alcohol by the action of yeast. The sugar can come from virtually
any source, including fruits and grains, although fuel-grade ethanol would probably come
mostly from corn. Car engines can burn pure alcohol or gasohol, an alcohol–gasoline mixture (10% ethanol in gasoline), with little modiﬁcation. Gasohol is now widely available
in the United States. The use of pure alcohol as a motor fuel is not feasible in most of the
United States because it does not vaporize easily when temperatures are low. However,
pure ethanol could be a very practical fuel in warm climates. For example, in Brazil, large
quantities of ethanol fuel are being produced for cars.
Methanol (CH3OH), an alcohol similar to ethanol, which has been used successfully
for many years in race cars, is now being evaluated as a motor fuel in California. A major
gasoline retailer has agreed to install pumps at 25 locations to dispense a fuel that is 85%
methanol and 15% gasoline for use in specially prepared automobiles. The California
Energy Commission feels that methanol has great potential for providing a secure, longterm energy supply that would alleviate air quality problems. Arizona and Colorado are
also considering methanol as a major source of portable energy.
Another potential source of liquid fuels is oil squeezed from seeds (seed oil). For example, some farmers in North Dakota, South Africa, and Australia are now using sunﬂower oil to replace diesel fuel. Oil seeds, found in a wide variety of plants, can be
processed to produce an oil composed mainly of carbon and hydrogen, which of course
reacts with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, water, and heat. It is hoped that oil-seed
plants can be developed that will thrive under soil and climatic conditions unsuitable for
corn and wheat. The main advantage of seed oil as a fuel is that it is renewable. Ideally,
fuel would be grown just like food crops.

264

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

Key Terms

For Review

Section 6.1
energy
law of conservation of energy
potential energy
kinetic energy
heat
work
pathway
state function (property)
system
surroundings
exothermic
endothermic
thermodynamics
ﬁrst law of thermodynamics
internal energy

Section 6.2
enthalpy
calorimeter
calorimetry
heat capacity
speciﬁc heat capacity
molar heat capacity
constant-pressure calorimetry
constant-volume calorimetry

Section 6.3
Hess’s law

Section 6.4
standard enthalpy of formation
standard state

Section 6.5
fossil fuels
petroleum
natural gas
coal
greenhouse effect

Section 6.6
syngas

Energy
䊉 The capacity to do work or produce heat
䊉 Is conserved (ﬁrst law of thermodynamics)
䊉 Can be converted from one form to another
䊉 Is a state function
䊉 Potential energy: stored energy
䊉 Kinetic energy: energy due to motion
䊉 The internal energy for a system is the sum of its potential and kinetic energies
䊉 The internal energy of a system can be changed by work and heat:
Eqw
Work
䊉 Force applied over a distance
䊉 For an expanding/contracting gas
䊉 Not a state function
w  P V
Heat
䊉 Energy ﬂow due to a temperature difference
䊉 Exothermic: energy as heat ﬂows out of a system
䊉 Endothermic: energy as heat ﬂows into a system
䊉 Not a state function
䊉 Measured for chemical reactions by calorimetry
Enthalpy
H  E  PV
䊉 Is a state function
䊉 Hess’s law: the change in enthalpy in going from a given set of reactants to a given
set of products is the same whether the process takes place in one step or a series
of steps
䊉 Standard enthalpies of formation ( Hf) can be used to calculate
H for a chemical
reaction

䊉

¢H°reaction  a np ¢H°f 1products2  a nr ¢H° 1reactants2
Energy use
䊉 Energy sources from fossil fuels are associated with difﬁcult supply and environmental impact issues
䊉 The greenhouse effect results from release into the atmosphere of gases, including
carbon dioxide, that strongly absorb infrared radiation, thus warming the earth
䊉 Alternative fuels are being sought to replace fossil fuels:
• Hydrogen
• Syngas from coal
• Biofuels from plants such as corn and certain seed-producing plants

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Deﬁne the following terms: potential energy, kinetic energy, path-dependent
function, state function, system, surroundings.

Active Learning Questions

265

2. Consider the following potential energy diagrams for two different reactions.

Products

a.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Products
Potential energy

Potential energy

Reactants

Reactants

b.

Which plot represents an exothermic reaction? In plot a, do the reactants on
average have stronger or weaker bonds than the products? In plot b, reactants
must gain potential energy to convert to products. How does this occur?
What is the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics? How can a system change its internal
energy, E? What are the sign conventions for thermodynamic quantities used in
this text?
When a gas expands, what is the sign of w? Why? When a gas contracts, what is
the sign of w? Why? What are the signs of q and w for the process of boiling water?
What is the heat gained/released at constant pressure equal to (qP  ?)? What is
the heat gained/released at constant volume equal to (qV  ?)? Explain why H
is obtained directly from a coffee-cup calorimeter, whereas E is obtained directly from a bomb calorimeter.
High-quality audio ampliﬁers generate large amounts of heat. To dissipate the
heat and prevent damage to the electronic components, heat-radiating metal ﬁns
are used. Would it be better to make these ﬁns out of iron or aluminum? Why?
(See Table 6.1 for speciﬁc heat capacities.)
Explain how calorimetry works to calculate H or E for a reaction. Does the
temperature of the calorimeter increase or decrease for an endothermic reaction?
For an exothermic reaction? Explain.
What is Hess’s law? When a reaction is reversed, what happens to the sign and
magnitude of H for that reversed reaction? When the coefﬁcients in a balanced
reaction are multiplied by a factor n, what happens to the sign and magnitude of
H for that multiplied reaction?
Deﬁne the standard enthalpy of formation. What are standard states for elements
and for compounds? Using Hess’s law, illustrate why the formula ¢H°reaction 
©np ¢H°f (products)  nr ¢H°f (reactants) works to calculate H for a reaction.
What are some of the problems associated with the world’s dependence on fossil
fuels? What are some alternative fuels for petroleum products?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the learning
that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical concepts.

1. Objects placed together eventually reach the same temperature.
When you go into a room and touch a piece of metal in that
room, it feels colder than a piece of plastic. Explain.

2. What is meant by the term lower in energy? Which is lower in
energy, a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen gases or liquid water? How do you know? Which of the two is more stable? How
do you know?
3. A ﬁre is started in a ﬁreplace by striking a match and lighting
crumpled paper under some logs. Explain all the energy transfers in this scenario using the terms exothermic, endothermic,
system, surroundings, potential energy, and kinetic energy in the
discussion.

266

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

4. Liquid water turns to ice. Is this process endothermic or exothermic? Explain what is occurring using the terms system,
surroundings, heat, potential energy, and kinetic energy in the
discussion.
5. Consider the following statements: “Heat is a form of energy,
and energy is conserved. The heat lost by a system must be equal
to the amount of heat gained by the surroundings. Therefore,
heat is conserved.” Indicate everything you think is correct
in these statements. Indicate everything you think is incorrect.
Correct the incorrect statements and explain.
6. Consider 5.5 L of a gas at a pressure of 3.0 atm in a cylinder
with a movable piston. The external pressure is changed so that
the volume changes to 10.5 L.
a. Calculate the work done, and indicate the correct sign.
b. Use the preceding data but consider the process to occur in
two steps. At the end of the ﬁrst step, the volume is 7.0 L.
The second step results in a ﬁnal volume of 10.5 L. Calculate the work done, and indicate the correct sign.
c. Calculate the work done if after the ﬁrst step the volume is
8.0 L and the second step leads to a volume of 10.5 L. Does
the work differ from that in part b? Explain.
7. In Question 6 the work calculated for the different conditions in
the various parts of the question was different even though the
system had the same initial and ﬁnal conditions. Based on this
information, is work a state function?
a. Explain how you know that work is not a state function.
b. Why does the work increase with an increase in the number
of steps?
c. Which two-step process resulted in more work, when the ﬁrst
step had the bigger change in volume or when the second step
had the bigger change in volume? Explain.
8. Photosynthetic plants use the following reaction to produce
glucose, cellulose, and so forth:

14. Standard enthalpies of formation are relative values. What are
H°f values relative to?
15. What is incomplete combustion of fossil fuels? Why can this be
a problem?
16. Explain the advantages and disadvantages of hydrogen as an
alternative fuel.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Potential and Kinetic Energy
17. Calculate the kinetic energy of a baseball (mass  5.25 oz) with
a velocity of 1.0  102 mi/h.
18. Calculate the kinetic energy of a 1.0  105-g object with a
velocity of 2.0  105 cm/s.
19. Which has the greater kinetic energy, an object with a mass of
2.0 kg and a velocity of 1.0 m/s or an object with a mass of
1.0 kg and a velocity of 2.0 m/s?
20. Consider the accompanying diagram. Ball A is allowed to fall
and strike ball B. Assume that all of ball A’s energy is transferred
to ball B, at point I, and that there is no loss of energy to other
sources. What is the kinetic energy and the potential energy of
ball B at point II? The potential energy is given by PE  mgz,
where m is the mass in kilograms, g is the gravitational constant
(9.81 m/s2), and z is the distance in meters.

A

2.00 kg

6CO2 1g2  6H2O1l2 ¬¡ C6H12O6 1s2  6O2 1g2
Sunlight

How might extensive destruction of forests exacerbate the greenhouse effect?
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

10.0 m
II
4.00 kg

3.00 m

B

Questions
9. Consider an airplane trip from Chicago, Illinois to Denver,
Colorado. List some path-dependent functions and some state
functions for the plane trip
10. How is average bond strength related to relative potential energies of the reactants and the products?
11. Assuming gasoline is pure C8H18(l), predict the signs of q and
w for the process of combusting gasoline into CO2(g) and
H2O(g).
12. What is the difference between H and E?
13. The enthalpy of combustion of CH4(g) when H2O(l) is formed
is 891 kJ/mol and the enthalpy of combustion of CH4(g) when
H2O(g) is formed is 803 kJ/mol. Use these data and Hess’s law
to determine the enthalpy of vaporization for water.

I

Heat and Work
21. Calculate E for each of the following.
a. q  47 kJ, w  88 kJ
b. q  82 kJ, w  47 kJ
c. q  47 kJ, w  0
d. In which of these cases do the surroundings do work on the
system?
22. A system undergoes a process consisting of the following two steps:
Step 1: The system absorbs 72 J of heat while 35 J of work is
done on it.

Exercises
Step 2: The system absorbs 35 J of heat while performing 72 J
of work.
Calculate E for the overall process.
23. If the internal energy of a thermodynamic system is increased
by 300. J while 75 J of expansion work is done, how much heat
was transferred and in which direction, to or from the system?
24. Calculate the internal energy change for each of the following.
a. One hundred (100.) joules of work are required to compress
a gas. At the same time, the gas releases 23 J of heat.
b. A piston is compressed from a volume of 8.30 L to 2.80 L
against a constant pressure of 1.90 atm. In the process, there
is a heat gain by the system of 350. J.
c. A piston expands against 1.00 atm of pressure from 11.2 L
to 29.1 L. In the process, 1037 J of heat is absorbed.
25. A sample of an ideal gas at 15.0 atm and 10.0 L is allowed to
expand against a constant external pressure of 2.00 atm at a
constant temperature. Calculate the work in units of kJ for the
gas expansion. (Hint: Boyle’s law applies.)
26. A piston performs work of 210. L atm on the surroundings, while
the cylinder in which it is placed expands from 10. L to 25 L.
At the same time, 45 J of heat is transferred from the surroundings to the system. Against what pressure was the piston
working?
27. Consider a mixture of air and gasoline vapor in a cylinder with
a piston. The original volume is 40. cm3. If the combustion of
this mixture releases 950. J of energy, to what volume will the
gases expand against a constant pressure of 650. torr if all the
energy of combustion is converted into work to push back
the piston?
28. As a system increases in volume, it absorbs 52.5 J of energy in
the form of heat from the surroundings. The piston is working
against a pressure of 0.500 atm. The ﬁnal volume of the system
is 58.0 L. What was the initial volume of the system if the internal
energy of the system decreased by 102.5 J?
29. A balloon ﬁlled with 39.1 mol helium has a volume of 876 L at
0.0C and 1.00 atm pressure. The temperature of the balloon is
increased to 38.0C as it expands to a volume of 998 L, the pressure remaining constant. Calculate q, w, and E for the helium
in the balloon. (The molar heat capacity for helium gas is
20.8 J/°C  mol.)
30. One mole of H2O(g) at 1.00 atm and 100.C occupies a volume
of 30.6 L. When one mole of H2O(g) is condensed to one mole
of H2O(l) at 1.00 atm and 100.C, 40.66 kJ of heat is released.
If the density of H2O(l) at this temperature and pressure is
0.996 g/cm3, calculate E for the condensation of one mole of
water at 1.00 atm and 100.C.

Properties of Enthalpy
31. One of the components of polluted air is NO. It is formed in the
high-temperature environment of internal combustion engines by
the following reaction:
N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2

¢H  180 kJ

Why are high temperatures needed to convert N2 and O2 to NO?

267

32. The reaction
SO3 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2SO4 1aq2
is the last step in the commercial production of sulfuric acid. The
enthalpy change for this reaction is 227 kJ. In designing a sulfuric acid plant, is it necessary to provide for heating or cooling
of the reaction mixture? Explain.
33. Are the following processes exothermic or endothermic?
a. When solid KBr is dissolved in water, the solution gets
colder.
b. Natural gas (CH4) is burned in a furnace.
c. When concentrated H2SO4 is added to water, the solution gets
very hot.
d. Water is boiled in a teakettle.
34. Are the following processes exothermic or endothermic?
a. the combustion of gasoline in a car engine
b. water condensing on a cold pipe
c. CO2 1s2 ¡ CO2 1g2
d. F2 1g2 ¡ 2F1g2
35. The overall reaction in a commercial heat pack can be represented as
4Fe1s2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2Fe2O3 1s2

¢H  1652 kJ

a. How much heat is released when 4.00 mol iron is reacted with
excess O2?
b. How much heat is released when 1.00 mol Fe2O3 is produced?
c. How much heat is released when 1.00 g iron is reacted with
excess O2?
d. How much heat is released when 10.0 g Fe and 2.00 g O2 are
reacted?
36. Consider the following reaction:
2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1l2

¢H  572 kJ

a. How much heat is evolved for the production of 1.00 mol of
H2O(l)?
b. How much heat is evolved when 4.03 g of hydrogen is reacted with excess oxygen?
c. How much heat is evolved when 186 g of oxygen is reacted
wih excess hydrogen?
d. The total volume of hydrogen gas needed to ﬁll the Hindenburg was 2.0  108 L at 1.0 atm and 25C. How much heat
was evolved when the Hindenburg exploded, assuming all of
the hydrogen reacted?
37. Consider the combustion of propane:
C3H8 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 3CO2 1g2  4H2O1l2

¢H  2221 kJ

Assume that all the heat in Sample Exercise 6.3 comes from the
combustion of propane. What mass of propane must be burned
to furnish this amount of energy assuming the heat transfer
process is 60.% efﬁcient?
38. Consider the following reaction:
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1l2

¢H  891 kJ

Calculate the enthalpy change for each of the following cases:
a. 1.00 g methane is burned in excess oxygen.
b. 1.00  103 L methane gas at 740. torr and 25C is burned in
excess oxygen.

268

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

39. For the process H2O1l2 ¡ H2O1g2 at 298 K and 1.0 atm, H
is more positive than E by 2.5 kJ/mol. What does the 2.5 kJ/mol
quantity represent?
40. For the following reactions at constant pressure, predict if H 
E, H  E, or H  E.
a. 2HF1g2 ¡ H2 1g2  F2 1g2
b. N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
c. 4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2

50. A 110.-g sample of copper (speciﬁc heat capacity  0.20 J/C 
g) is heated to 82.4C and then placed in a container of water at
22.3C. The ﬁnal temperature of the water and copper is 24.9C.
What is the mass of the water in the container, assuming that all
the heat lost by the copper is gained by the water?
51. In a coffee-cup calorimeter, 50.0 mL of 0.100 M AgNO3 and
50.0 mL of 0.100 M HCl are mixed to yield the following
reaction:
Ag 1aq2  Cl 1aq2 ¡ AgCl1s2

Calorimetry and Heat Capacity
41. Consider the substances in Table 6.1. Which substance requires
the largest amount of energy to raise the temperature of 25.0 g
of the substance from 15.0C to 37.0C? Calculate the energy.
Which substance in Table 6.1 has the largest temperature change
when 550. g of the substance absorbs 10.7 kJ of energy?
Calculate the temperature change.
42. The speciﬁc heat capacity of silver is 0.24 J/°C  g.
a. Calculate the energy required to raise the temperature of
150.0 g Ag from 273 K to 298 K.
b. Calculate the energy required to raise the temperature of
1.0 mol Ag by 1.0C (called the molar heat capacity of
silver).
c. It takes 1.25 kJ of energy to heat a sample of pure silver
from 12.0C to 15.2C. Calculate the mass of the sample of
silver.
43. A 5.00-g sample of one of the substances listed in Table 6.1 was
heated from 25.2C to 55.1C, requiring 133 J to do so. What
substance was it?
44. It takes 585 J of energy to raise the temperature of 125.6 g mercury from 20.0C to 53.5C. Calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity
and the molar heat capacity of mercury.
45. A 30.0-g sample of water at 280. K is mixed with 50.0 g of water
at 330. K. Calculate the ﬁnal temperature of the mixture
assuming no heat loss to the surroundings.
46. A biology experiment requires the preparation of a water bath
at 37.0C (body temperature). The temperature of the cold tap
water is 22.0C, and the temperature of the hot tap water is
55.0C. If a student starts with 90.0 g of cold water, what mass
of hot water must be added to reach 37.0C?
47. A 5.00-g sample of aluminum pellets (speciﬁc heat capacity 
0.89 J/C  g) and a 10.00-g sample of iron pellets (speciﬁc
heat capacity  0.45 J/C  g) are heated to 100.0C. The mixture
of hot iron and aluminum is then dropped into 97.3 g of water
at 22.0C. Calculate the ﬁnal temperature of the metal and water mixture, assuming no heat loss to the surroundings.
48. Hydrogen gives off 120. J/g of energy when burned in oxygen, and methane gives off 50. J/g under the same circumstances. If a mixture of 5.0 g of hydrogen and 10. g of methane
is burned, and the heat released is transferred to 50.0 g of water
at 25.0C, what ﬁnal temperature will be reached by the water?
49. A 150.0-g sample of a metal at 75.0C is added to 150.0 g of
H2O at 15.0C. The temperature of the water rises to 18.3C.
Calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity of the metal, assuming that
all the heat lost by the metal is gained by the water.

The two solutions were initially at 22.60C, and the ﬁnal temperature is 23.40C. Calculate the heat that accompanies this
reaction in kJ/mol of AgCl formed. Assume that the combined
solution has a mass of 100.0 g and a speciﬁc heat capacity of
4.18 J/C  g.
52. In a coffee-cup calorimeter, 1.60 g of NH4NO3 is mixed with
75.0 g of water at an initial temperature of 25.00C. After dissolution of the salt, the ﬁnal temperature of the calorimeter contents is 23.34C. Assuming the solution has a heat capacity of
4.18 J/C  g and assuming no heat loss to the calorimeter, calculate the enthalpy change for the dissolution of NH4NO3 in units
of kJ/mol.
53. Consider the dissolution of CaCl2:

CaCl2 1s2 ¡ Ca2 1aq2  2Cl 1aq2

¢H  81.5 kJ

An 11.0-g sample of CaCl2 is dissolved in 125 g of water, with
both substances at 25.0C. Calculate the ﬁnal temperature of the
solution assuming no heat lost to the surroundings and assuming the solution has a speciﬁc heat capacity of 4.18 J/C  g.
54. Consider the reaction
2HCl1aq2  Ba1OH2 2 1aq2 ¡ BaCl2 1aq2  2H2O1l2
¢H  118 kJ
Calculate the heat when 100.0 mL of 0.500 M HCl is mixed with
300.0 mL of 0.100 M Ba(OH)2. Assuming that the temperature of
both solutions was initially 25.0C and that the ﬁnal mixture has
a mass of 400.0 g and a speciﬁc heat capacity of 4.18 J/C  g,
calculate the ﬁnal temperature of the mixture.
55. The heat capacity of a bomb calorimeter was determined by burning 6.79 g of methane (energy of combustion  802 kJ/mol
CH4) in the bomb. The temperature changed by 10.8C.
a. What is the heat capacity of the bomb?
b. A 12.6-g sample of acetylene, C2H2, produced a temperature
increase of 16.9C in the same calorimeter. What is the energy of combustion of acetylene (in kJ/mol)?
56. A 0.1964-g sample of quinone (C6H4O2) is burned in a bomb
calorimeter that has a heat capacity of 1.56 kJ/C. The temperature of the calorimeter increases by 3.2C. Calculate the energy
of combustion of quinone per gram and per mole.

Hess’s Law
57. The enthalpy of combustion of solid carbon to form carbon dioxide is 393.7 kJ/mol carbon, and the enthalpy of combustion of
carbon monoxide to form carbon dioxide is 283.3 kJ/mol CO.
Use these data to calculate H for the reaction
2C1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO1g2

269

Exercises
58. Combustion reactions involve reacting a substance with oxygen.
When compounds containing carbon and hydrogen are combusted,
carbon dioxide and water are the products. Using the enthalpies
of combustion for C4H4 (2341 kJ/mol), C4H8 (2755 kJ/mol),
and H2 (286 kJ/mol), calculate H for the reaction

64. Given the following data
P4 1s2  6Cl2 1g2 ¡ 4PCl3 1g2
PCl3 1g2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ PCl5 1g2

¢H  84.2 kJ
¢H  285.7 kJ

calculate H for the reaction

59. Given the following data
NH3 1g2 ¡

¢H  2967.3 kJ

PCl3 1g2  12 O2 1g2 ¡ Cl3PO1g2

C4H4 1g2  2H2 1g2 ¡ C4H8 1g2
1
2 N2 1g2

¢H  1225.6 kJ

P4 1s2  5O2 1g2 ¡ P4O10 1s2



3
2 H2 1g2

P4O10 1s2  6PCl5 1g2 ¡ 10Cl3PO1g2

¢H  46 kJ

2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1g2

¢H  484 kJ

calculate H for the reaction
2N2 1g2  6H2O1g2 ¡ 3O2 1g2  4NH3 1g2
On the basis of the enthalpy change, is this a useful reaction for
the synthesis of ammonia?
60. Given the following data
2ClF1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ Cl2O1g2  F2O1g2

¢H  167.4 kJ

2ClF3 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ Cl2O1g2  3F2O1g2

¢H  341.4 kJ

2F2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2F2O1g2

¢H  43.4 kJ

calculate H for the reaction
ClF1g2  F2 1g2 ¡ ClF3 1g2
61. Given the following data
2O3 1g2 ¡ 3O2 1g2

¢H  427 kJ

O2 1g2 ¡ 2O1g2

¢H  495 kJ

NO1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  O2 1g2

¢H  199 kJ

Standard Enthalpies of Formation
65. Give the deﬁnition of the standard enthalpy of formation for a
substance. Write separate reactions for the formation of NaCl,
H2O, C6H12O6, and PbSO4 that have H values equal to Hf
for each compound.
66. Write reactions for which the enthalpy change will be
a. H f for solid aluminum oxide.
b. The standard enthalpy of combustion of liquid ethanol,
C2H5OH(l).
c. The standard enthalpy of neutralization of sodium hydroxide
solution by hydrochloric acid.
d. H f for gaseous vinyl chloride, C2H3Cl(g).
e. The enthalpy of combustion of liquid benzene, C6H6(l ).
f. The enthalpy of solution of solid ammonium bromide.
67. Use the values of H f in Appendix 4 to calculate
following reactions.

H for the

a.
(g)

+

(g)

+

(g)

(g)

+

(g)

calculate H for the reaction
NO1g2  O1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2
62. The bombardier beetle uses an explosive discharge as a defensive measure. The chemical reaction involved is the oxidation of hydroquinone by hydrogen peroxide to produce
quinone and water:
C6H4 1OH2 2 1aq2  H2O2 1aq2 ¡ C6H4O2 1aq2  2H2O1l2
Calculate H for this reaction from the following data:
C6H4 1OH2 2 1aq2 ¡ C6H4O2 1aq2  H2 1g2
¢H  177.4 kJ
H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ H2O2 1aq2

H2 1g2 

1
2 O2 1g2

¡ H2O1g2

H2O1g2 ¡ H2O1l2

¢H  191.2 kJ
¢H  241.8 kJ
¢H  43.8 kJ

63. Given the following data
Ca1s2  2C1graphite2 ¡ CaC2 1s2
Ca1s2  12 O2 1g2 ¡ CaO1s2

CaO1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ Ca1OH2 2 1aq2

C2H2 1g2  52 O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  H2O1l2

C1graphite2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2

¢H  62.8 kJ
¢H  635.5 kJ
¢H  653.1 kJ
¢H  1300. kJ
¢H  393.5 kJ

calculate H for the reaction
CaC2 1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ Ca1OH2 2 1aq2  C2H2 1g2

N

H

O

C

b. Ca3 1PO4 2 2 1s2  3H2SO4 1l2 ¡ 3CaSO4 1s2  2H3PO4 1l2
c. NH3 1g2  HCl1g2 ¡ NH4Cl1s2
68. Use the values of H f in Appendix 4 to calculate H for the
following reactions. (See Exercise 67.)
a.
(l)

+

(g)

(g)

+

(g)

b. SiCl4 1l2  2H2O1l2 ¡ SiO2 1s2  4HCl1aq2
c. MgO1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ Mg1OH2 2 1s2
69. The Ostwald process for the commercial production of nitric acid
from ammonia and oxygen involves the following steps:
4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2
2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

3NO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2HNO3 1aq2  NO1g2
a. Use the values of Hf in Appendix 4 to calculate the value
of H for each of the preceding reactions.
b. Write the overall equation for the production of nitric acid by
the Ostwald process by combining the preceding equations.
(Water is also a product.) Is the overall reaction exothermic or
endothermic?

270

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

70. Calculate H for each of the following reactions using the data
in Appendix 4:
4Na1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2Na2O1s2

2Na1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2NaOH1aq2  H2 1g2
2Na1s2  CO2 1g2 ¡ Na2O1s2  CO1g2

Explain why a water or carbon dioxide ﬁre extinguisher might
not be effective in putting out a sodium ﬁre.
71. The reusable booster rockets of the space shuttle use a mixture
of aluminum and ammonium perchlorate as fuel. A possible
reaction is
3Al1s2  3NH4ClO4 1s2
¡ Al2O3 1s2  AlCl3 1s2  3NO1g2  6H2O1g2

80. The complete combustion of acetylene, C2H2(g), produces 1300. kJ
of energy per mole of acetylene consumed. How many grams
of acetylene must be burned to produce enough heat to raise the
temperature of 1.00 gal of water by 10.0C if the process is 80.0%
efﬁcient? Assume the density of water is 1.00 g/cm3.

Additional Exercises
81. Three gas-phase reactions were run in a constant-pressure piston
apparatus as illustrated below. For each reaction, give the balanced reaction and predict the sign of w (the work done) for the
reaction.
1 atm

Calculate H for this reaction.
72. The space shuttle orbiter utilizes the oxidation of methylhydrazine by dinitrogen tetroxide for propulsion:

1 atm
S
O

4N2H3CH3 1l2  5N2O4 1l2 ¡ 12H2O1g2  9N2 1g2  4CO2 1g2
Calculate H  for this reaction.
73. Consider the reaction
2ClF3 1g2  2NH3 1g2 ¡ N2 1g2  6HF1g2  Cl2 1g2
¢H°  1196 kJ

a.
1 atm

Calculate H f for ClF3(g).
74. The standard enthalpy of combustion of ethene gas, C2H4(g),
is 1411.1 kJ/mol at 298 K. Given the following enthalpies of
formation, calculate H f for C2H4(g).
CO2 1g2

393.5 kJ/mol

H2O1l2

285.8 kJ/mol

Energy Consumption and Sources

1 atm
Cl
C
O

b.

75. Ethanol (C2H5OH) has been proposed as an alternative fuel.
Calculate the standard of enthalpy of combustion per gram of
liquid ethanol.
76. Methanol (CH3OH) has also been proposed as an alternative
fuel. Calculate the standard enthalpy of combustion per gram
of liquid methanol and compare this answer to that for ethanol
in Exercise 75.
77. Some automobiles and buses have been equipped to burn propane
(C3H8). Compare the amounts of energy that can be obtained per
gram of C3H8(g) and per gram of gasoline, assuming that gasoline is pure octane, C8H18(l). (See Sample Exercise 6.11.) Look
up the boiling point of propane. What disadvantages are there to
using propane instead of gasoline as a fuel?
78. Acetylene (C2H2) and butane (C4H10) are gaseous fuels with enthalpies of combustion of 49.9 kJ/g and 49.5 kJ/g, respectively.
Compare the energy available from the combustion of a given volume of acetylene to the combustion energy from the same volume
of butane at the same temperature and pressure.
79. Assume that 4.19  106 kJ of energy is needed to heat a home.
If this energy is derived from the combustion of methane
(CH4), what volume of methane, measured at STP, must
be burned? ( Hcombustion for CH4  891 kJ/mol)

1 atm

1 atm
O
N

c.

If just the balanced reactions were given, how could you predict
the sign of w for a reaction?
82. Consider the following changes:
a. N2 1g2 ¡ N2 1l2
b. CO1g2  H2O1g2 ¡ H2 1g2  CO2 1g2
c. Ca3P2 1s2  6H2O1l2 ¡ 3Ca1OH2 2 1s2  2PH3 1g2
d. 2CH3OH1l2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  4H2O1l2
e. I2 1s2 ¡ I2 1g2
At constant temperature and pressure, in which of these
changes is work done by the system on the surroundings? By
the surroundings on the system? In which of them is no work
done?

Challenge Problems
83. Consider the following cyclic process carried out in two steps
on a gas:
Step 1: 45 J of heat is added to the gas, and 10. J of expansion
work is performed.
Step 2: 60. J of heat is removed from the gas as the gas is compressed back to the initial state.

b. Both acetylene (C2H2) and benzene (C6H6) can be used as fuels. Which compound would liberate more energy per gram
when combusted in air?
92. Using the following data, calculate the standard heat of formation of ICl(g) in kJ/mol:
Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2Cl1g2

I2 1s2 ¡ I2 1g2

87.

88.

89.

90.

Fe2O3 1s2  3CO1g2 ¡ 2Fe1s2  3CO2 1g2

3Fe2O3 1s2  CO1g2 ¡ 2Fe3O4 1s2  CO2 1g2
Fe3O4 1s2  CO1g2 ¡ 3FeO1s2  CO2 1g2

¢H°  62.8 kJ

Challenge Problems
94. Consider 2.00 mol of an ideal gas that is taken from state A (PA 
2.00 atm, VA  10.0 L) to state B (PB  1.00 atm, VB  30.0 L)
by two different pathways:
a

VC  30.0 L
b
PC  2.00 atm

88n
2

State A
88n
V  10.0 L
a A
b
PA  2.00 atm
1

State B
VB  30.0 L
b
a
PB  1.00 atm

88n
3

a

4
88n

VD  10.0 L
b
PD  1.00 atm

These pathways are summarized on the following graph of
P versus V:

A

2

1

3
1

C

2

D

4

B

¢H°  23 kJ
¢H°  39 kJ
¢H°  18 kJ

calculate H for the reaction
FeO1s2  CO1g2 ¡ Fe1s2  CO2 1g2
91. At 298 K, the standard enthalpies of formation for C2H2(g) and
C6H6(l) are 227 kJ/mol and 49 kJ/mol, respectively.
a. Calculate H for
C6H6 1l2 ¡ 3C2H2 1g2

¢H°  211.3 kJ

93. Calculate H for each of the following reactions, which occur
in the atmosphere.
a. C2H4 1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ CH3CHO1g2  O2 1g2
b. O3 1g2  NO1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  O2 1g2
c. SO3 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2SO4 1aq2
d. 2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

P (atm)

86.

¢H°  151.0 kJ

ICl1g2 ¡ I1g2  Cl1g2

2K1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2KOH1aq2  H2 1g2

85.

¢H°  242.3 kJ

I2 1g2 ¡ 2I1g2

Calculate the work for the gas compression in Step 2.
84. Calculate H for the reaction

A 5.00-g chunk of potassium is dropped into 1.00 kg water at
24.0C. What is the ﬁnal temperature of the water after the preceding reaction occurs? Assume that all the heat is used to raise
the temperature of the water. (Never run this reaction. It is very
dangerous; it bursts into ﬂame!)
The enthalpy of neutralization for the reaction of a strong acid
with a strong base is 56 kJ/mol of water produced. How much
energy will be released when 200.0 mL of 0.400 M HCl is mixed
with 150.0 mL of 0.500 M NaOH?
When 1.00 L of 2.00 M Na2SO4 solution at 30.0C is added to
2.00 L of 0.750 M Ba(NO3)2 solution at 30.0C in a calorimeter, a white solid (BaSO4) forms. The temperature of the mixture
increases to 42.0C. Assuming that the speciﬁc heat capacity of
the solution is 6.37 J/C  g and that the density of the ﬁnal
solution is 2.00 g/mL, calculate the enthalpy change per mole of
BaSO4 formed.
If a student performs an endothermic reaction in a calorimeter,
how does the calculated value of H differ from the actual value
if the heat exchanged with the calorimeter is not taken into
account?
In a bomb calorimeter, the reaction vessel is surrounded by water that must be added for each experiment. Since the amount of
water is not constant from experiment to experiment, the mass
of water must be measured in each case. The heat capacity of
the calorimeter is broken down into two parts: the water and the
calorimeter components. If a calorimeter contains 1.00 kg water
and has a total heat capacity of 10.84 kJ/C, what is the heat
capacity of the calorimeter components?
The bomb calorimeter in Exercise 88 is ﬁlled with 987 g of water. The initial temperature of the calorimeter contents is 23.32C.
A 1.056-g sample of benzoic acid ( Ecomb  26.42 kJ/g) is
combusted in the calorimeter. What is the ﬁnal temperature of
the calorimeter contents?
Given the following data

271

0

10

20
V (L)

30

Calculate the work (in units of J) associated with the two pathways. Is work a state function? Explain.
95. Combustion of table sugar produces CO2(g) and H2O(l). When
1.46 g of table sugar is combusted in a constant-volume (bomb)
calorimeter, 24.00 kJ of heat is liberated.
a. Assuming that table sugar is pure sucrose, C12H22O11(s), write
the balanced equation for the combustion reaction.

272

Chapter Six Thermochemistry

b. Calculate E in kJ/mol C12H22O11 for the combustion reaction of sucrose.
c. Calculate H in kJ/mol C12H22O11 for the combustion reaction of sucrose at 25C.
96. The sun supplies energy at a rate of about 1.0 kilowatt per square
meter of surface area (1 watt  1 J/s). The plants in an agricultural ﬁeld produce the equivalent of 20. kg of sucrose (C12H22O11)
per hour per hectare (1 ha  10,000 m2). Assuming that sucrose
is produced by the reaction
12CO2 1g2  11H2O1l2 ¡ C12H22O11 1s2  12O2 1g2
¢H  5640 kJ
calculate the percentage of sunlight used to produce the sucrose—that is, determine the efﬁciency of photosynthesis.
97. The best solar panels currently available are about 13% efﬁcient
in converting sunlight to electricity. A typical home will use
about 40. kWh of electricity per day (1 kWh  1 kilowatt hour;
1 kW  1000 J/s). Assuming 8.0 hours of useful sunlight per
day, calculate the minimum solar panel surface area necessary
to provide all of a typical home’s electricity. (See Exercise 96
for the energy rate supplied by the sun.)
98. On Easter Sunday, April 3, 1983, nitric acid spilled from a tank
car near downtown Denver, Colorado. The spill was neutralized
with sodium carbonate:
2HNO3 1aq2  Na2CO3 1s2 ¡ 2NaNO3 1aq2  H2O1l2  CO2 1g2
a. Calculate H for this reaction. Approximately 2.0  104 gal
nitric acid was spilled. Assume that the acid was an aqueous
solution containing 70.0% HNO3 by mass with a density of
1.42 g/cm3. How much sodium carbonate was required for
complete neutralization of the spill, and how much heat was
evolved? ( H f for NaNO3(aq)  467 kJ/mol)
b. According to The Denver Post for April 4, 1983, authorities
feared that dangerous air pollution might occur during the
neutralization. Considering the magnitude of H, what was
their major concern?
99. A piece of chocolate cake contains about 400 Calories. A nutritional Calorie is equal to 1000 calories (thermochemical calories), which is equal to 4.184 kJ. How many 8-in-high steps must
a 180-lb man climb to expend the 400 Cal from the piece of
cake? See Exercise 20 for the formula for potential energy.
100. The standard enthalpy of formation of H2O(l) at 298 K is
285.8 kJ/mol. Calculate the change in internal energy for the
following process at 298 K and 1 atm:
H2O1l2 ¡ H2 1g2  12 O2 1g2

¢E°  ?

(Hint: Using the ideal gas equation, derive an expression for
work in terms of n, R, and T.)
101. You have a 1.00-mol sample of water at 30.C and you heat it
until you have gaseous water at 140.C. Calculate q for the entire
process. Use the following data.
Specific heat capacity of ice  2.03 J °C  g

102. A 500.0-g sample of an element at 195C is dropped into an
ice–water mixture; 109.5 g of ice melts and an ice–water mixture remains. Calculate the speciﬁc heat of the element. See
Exercise 101 for pertinent information.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

103. The preparation of NO2(g) from N2(g) and O2(g) is an endothermic reaction:
N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2 1unbalanced2
The enthalpy change of reaction for the balanced equation (with
lowest whole-number coefﬁcients) is H  67.7 kJ. If 2.50 
102 mL of N2(g) at 100.C and 3.50 atm and 4.50  102 mL of
O2(g) at 100.C and 3.50 atm are mixed, what amount of heat is
necessary to synthesize NO2(g)?
104. Nitromethane, CH3NO2, can be used as a fuel. When the liquid
is burned, the (unbalanced) reaction is mainly
CH3NO2 1l2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  N2 1g2  H2O1g2
a. The standard enthalpy change of reaction ( Hrxn) for the balanced reaction (with lowest whole-number coefﬁcients) is
1288.5 kJ. Calculate the Hf for nitromethane.
b. A 15.0-L ﬂask containing a sample of nitromethane is ﬁlled
with O2 and the ﬂask is heated to 100.ºC. At this temperature, and after the reaction is complete, the total pressure of
all the gases inside the ﬂask is 950. torr. If the mole fraction of nitrogen (xnitrogen) is 0.134 after the reaction is complete, what mass of nitrogen was produced?
105. A cubic piece of uranium metal (speciﬁc heat capacity 
0.117 J/°C  g) at 200.0C is dropped into 1.00 L of deuterium
oxide (“heavy water,” speciﬁc heat capacity  4.211 J/°C  g2
at 25.5C. The ﬁnal temperature of the uranium and deuterium
oxide mixture is 28.5C. Given the densities of uranium
(19.05 g/cm3) and deuterium oxide (1.11 g/mL), what is the
edge length of the cube of uranium?

Marathon Problems*
These problems are designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

106. A sample consisting of 22.7 g of a nongaseous, unstable compound X is placed inside a metal cylinder with a radius of
8.00 cm, and a piston is carefully placed on the surface of the
compound so that, for all practical purposes, the distance between the bottom of the cylinder and the piston is zero. (A hole
in the piston allows trapped air to escape as the piston is placed
on the compound; then this hole is plugged so that nothing in-

Specific heat capacity of water  4.18 J °C  g
Specific heat capacity of steam  2.02 J °C  g
H2O1s2 ¡ H2O1l2
H2O1l2 ¡ H2O1g2

¢Hfusion  6.02 kJ mol 1at 0°C2

¢Hvaporization  40.7 kJ mol 1at 100.°C2

*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 68,
No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of Chemical
Education, Inc.

Marathon Problems
side the cylinder can escape.) The piston-and-cylinder apparatus
is carefully placed in 10.00 kg of water at 25.00C. The barometric pressure is 778 torr.
When the compound spontaneously decomposes, the piston moves up, the temperature of the water reaches a maximum of 29.52C, and then it gradually decreases as the water
loses heat to the surrounding air. The distance between the
piston and the bottom of the cylinder, at the maximum
temperature, is 59.8 cm. Chemical analysis shows that the
cylinder contains 0.300 mol carbon dioxide, 0.250 mol liquid
water, 0.025 mol oxygen gas, and an undetermined amount of
a gaseous element A.
It is known that the enthalpy change for the decomposition
of X, according to the reaction described above, is 1893 kJ/mol
X. The standard enthalpies of formation for gaseous carbon dioxide and liquid water are 393.5 kJ/mol and 286 kJ/mol,
respectively. The heat capacity for water is 4.184 J/C  g. The
conversion factor between L  atm and J can be determined
from the two values for the gas constant R, namely, 0.08206
L  atm/mol  K and 8.3145 J/mol  K. The vapor pressure of
water at 29.5C is 31 torr. Assume that the heat capacity of the
piston-and-cylinder apparatus is negligible and that the piston
has negligible mass.

273

Given the preceding information, determine
a. The formula for X.
b. The pressure–volume work (in kJ) for the decomposition of
the 22.7-g sample of X.
c. The molar change in internal energy for the decomposition of
X and the approximate standard enthalpy of formation for X.
107. A gaseous hydrocarbon reacts completely with oxygen gas to
form carbon dioxide and water vapor. Given the following data,
determine Hf for the hydrocarbon:
¢H°rxn  2044.5 kJ mol hydrocarbon

¢H°f 1CO2 2  393.5 kJ mol

¢H°f 1H2O2  242 kJ mol

Density of CO2 and H2O product mixture at 1.00 atm, 200.C 
0.751g/L
The density of the hydrocarbon is less than the density of Kr at
the same conditions.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at College.hmco.com/
PIC/Zumdahl7e.

7

Atomic Structure and
Periodicity

Contents
7.1
7.2
•
7.3
7.4
7.5
•
7.6
7.7
7.8
7.9
7.10
7.11
7.12
•
•
•
7.13
•
•

Electromagnetic Radiation
The Nature of Matter
The Photoelectric Effect
The Atomic Spectrum of
Hydrogen
The Bohr Model
The Quantum Mechanical
Model of the Atom
The Physical Meaning of a
Wave Function
Quantum Numbers
Orbital Shapes and Energies
Electron Spin and the Pauli
Principle
Polyelectronic Atoms
The History of the Periodic
Table
The Aufbau Principle and
the Periodic Table
Periodic Trends in Atomic
Properties
Ionization Energy
Electron Afﬁnity
Atomic Radius
The Properties of a Group:
The Alkali Metals
Information Contained in the
Periodic Table
The Alkali Metals

Light refracted through a prism.

274

I

n the past 200 years, a great deal of experimental evidence has accumulated to support the atomic model. This theory has proved to be both extremely useful and physically
reasonable. When atoms were ﬁrst suggested by the Greek philosophers Democritus and
Leucippus about 400 B.C., the concept was based mostly on intuition. In fact, for the following 20 centuries, no convincing experimental evidence was available to support the
existence of atoms. The ﬁrst real scientiﬁc data were gathered by Lavoisier and others
from quantitative measurements of chemical reactions. The results of these stoichiometric experiments led John Dalton to propose the ﬁrst systematic atomic theory. Dalton’s
theory, although crude, has stood the test of time extremely well.
Once we came to “believe in” atoms, it was logical to ask: What is the nature of an
atom? Does an atom have parts, and if so, what are they? In Chapter 2 we considered
some of the experiments most important for shedding light on the nature of the atom. Now
we will see how the atomic theory has evolved to its present state.
One of the most striking things about the chemistry of the elements is the periodic
repetition of properties. There are several groups of elements that show great similarities
in chemical behavior. As we saw in Chapter 2, these similarities led to the development
of the periodic table of the elements. In this chapter we will see that the modern theory
of atomic structure accounts for periodicity in terms of the electron arrangements in atoms.
However, before we examine atomic structure, we must consider the revolution that
took place in physics in the ﬁrst 30 years of the twentieth century. During that time, experiments were carried out, the results of which could not be explained by the theories of
classical physics developed by Isaac Newton and many others who followed him. A radical new theory called quantum mechanics was developed to account for the behavior of
light and atoms. This “new physics” provides many surprises for humans who are used
to the macroscopic world, but it seems to account ﬂawlessly (within the bounds of necessary approximations) for the behavior of matter.
As the ﬁrst step in our exploration of this revolution in science we will consider the
properties of light, more properly called electromagnetic radiation.

7.1

Wavelength  and frequency  are
inversely related.

c  speed of light
 2.9979  108 m/s

Electromagnetic Radiation

One of the ways that energy travels through space is by electromagnetic radiation. The
light from the sun, the energy used to cook food in a microwave oven, the X rays used
by dentists, and the radiant heat from a ﬁreplace are all examples of electromagnetic
radiation. Although these forms of radiant energy seem quite different, they all exhibit the
same type of wavelike behavior and travel at the speed of light in a vacuum.
Waves have three primary characteristics: wavelength, frequency, and speed. Wavelength (symbolized by the lowercase Greek letter lambda, ␭) is the distance between two
consecutive peaks or troughs in a wave, as shown in Fig. 7.1. The frequency (symbolized by the lowercase Greek letter nu, ␯) is deﬁned as the number of waves (cycles) per
second that pass a given point in space. Since all types of electromagnetic radiation travel
at the speed of light, short-wavelength radiation must have a high frequency. You can see
this in Fig. 7.1, where three waves are shown traveling between two points at constant
speed. Note that the wave with the shortest wavelength (␭3) has the highest frequency and
the wave with the longest wavelength (␭1) has the lowest frequency. This implies an inverse
relationship between wavelength and frequency, that is, ␭ r 1␯, or
ln  c

275

276

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
1 second
λ1

Visualization: Electromagnetic
Wave

ν1 = 4 cycles/second = 4 hertz
λ2

ν2 = 8 cycles/second = 8 hertz
λ3

FIGURE 7.1
The nature of waves. Note that the radiation with the shortest wavelength has the
highest frequency.

ν3 = 16 cycles/second = 16 hertz

where ␭ is the wavelength in meters, ␯ is the frequency in cycles per second, and c is the
speed of light (2.9979108 m/s). In the SI system, cycles is understood, and the unit per
second becomes 1/s, or s1, which is called the hertz (abbreviated Hz).
Electromagnetic radiation is classiﬁed as shown in Fig. 7.2. Radiation provides an
important means of energy transfer. For example, the energy from the sun reaches the
earth mainly in the form of visible and ultraviolet radiation, whereas the glowing coals
of a ﬁreplace transmit heat energy by infrared radiation. In a microwave oven the water molecules in food absorb microwave radiation, which increases their motions. This
energy is then transferred to other types of molecules via collisions, causing an increase
in the food’s temperature. As we proceed in the study of chemistry, we will consider
many of the classes of electromagnetic radiation and the ways in which they affect
matter.
Although the waves associated with light
are not obvious to the naked eye, ocean
waves provide a familiar source of
recreation.
Wavelength in meters
10–10

Gamma
rays

X rays

10–8 4 × 10–7 7 × 10–7 10–4
Ultraviolet

Visible

10–12

Infrared

10–2

1

Microwaves

10 2

10 4

Radio waves
FM

Shortwave AM

FIGURE 7.2
Classiﬁcation of electromagnetic radiation.
Spectrum adapted by permission from C. W. Keenan,
D. C. Kleinfelter, and J. H. Wood, General College
Chemistry, 6th ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1980).

4 × 10–7

5 × 10–7

6 × 10–7

7 × 10–7

7.2 The Nature of Matter

277

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Flies That Dye
editerranean and Mexican fruit ﬂies are formidable pests
that have the potential to seriously damage several important fruit crops. Because of this, there have been several
widely publicized sprayings of residential areas in southern
California with the pesticide malathion to try to control fruit
ﬂies. Now there may be a better way to kill fruit ﬂies—with
a blend of two common dyes (red dye no. 28 and yellow
dye no. 8) long used to color drugs and cosmetics. One of
the most interesting things about this new pesticide is that it

M

Sample Exercise 7.1

is activated by light. After an insect eats the blend of dyes,
the molecules absorb light (through the insect’s transparent
body), which causes them to generate oxidizing agents that
attack the proteins and cell membranes in the bug’s body.
Death occurs within 12 hours.
The sunlight that turns on the dye’s toxicity after the ﬂy
ingests it also degrades the dye in the environment, making
it relatively safe. It appears likely that in the near future the
fruit ﬂy will “dye” with little harm to the environment.

Frequency of Electromagnetic Radiation
The brilliant red colors seen in ﬁreworks are due to the emission of light with wavelengths
around 650 nm when strontium salts such as Sr(NO3)2 and SrCO3 are heated. (This can
be easily demonstrated in the lab by dissolving one of these salts in methanol that contains
a little water and igniting the mixture in an evaporating dish.) Calculate the frequency of
red light of wavelength 6.50  102 nm.
Solution
We can convert wavelength to frequency using the equation
ln  c

When a strontium salt is dissolved in
methanol (with a little water) and ignited,
it gives a brilliant red ﬂame. The red color
is produced by emission of light when
electrons, excited by the energy of the
burning methanol, fall back to their
ground states.

c
l

where c  2.9979  108 m/s. In this case ␭  6.50  102 nm. Changing the wavelength
to meters, we have
1m
6.50  102 nm  9
 6.50  107 m
10 nm
and
c
2.9979  108 m/s
n 
 4.61  1014 s1  4.61  1014 Hz
l
6.50  107 m
See Exercises 7.31 and 7.32.

7.2

Visualization: Electriﬁed Pickle

or n 

The Nature of Matter

It is probably fair to say that at the end of the nineteenth century, physicists were feeling
rather smug. Theories could explain phenomena as diverse as the motions of the planets
and the dispersion of visible light by a prism. Rumor has it that students were being discouraged from pursuing physics as a career because it was felt that all the major problems had been solved, or at least described in terms of the current physical theories.
At the end of the nineteenth century, the idea prevailed that matter and energy were
distinct. Matter was thought to consist of particles, whereas energy in the form of light
(electromagnetic radiation) was described as a wave. Particles were things that had mass
and whose position in space could be speciﬁed. Waves were described as massless and
delocalized; that is, their position in space could not be speciﬁed. It also was assumed
that there was no intermingling of matter and light. Everything known before 1900 seemed
to ﬁt neatly into this view.

278

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
When alternating current at 110 volts is applied to a dill pickle, a glowing discharge occurs. The current
ﬂowing between the electrodes (forks), which is supported by the Na and Cl ions present, apparently
causes some sodium atoms to form in an excited state. When these atoms relax to the ground state,
they emit visible light at 589 nm, producing the yellow glow reminiscent of sodium vapor lamps.

At the beginning of the twentieth century, however, certain experimental results suggested that this picture was incorrect. The ﬁrst important advance came in 1900 from the
German physicist Max Planck (1858–1947). Studying the radiation proﬁles emitted by solid
bodies heated to incandescence, Planck found that the results could not be explained in terms
of the physics of his day, which held that matter could absorb or emit any quantity of energy. Planck could account for these observations only by postulating that energy can be
gained or lost only in whole-number multiples of the quantity h␯, where h is a constant
called Planck’s constant, determined by experiment to have the value 6.626  1034 J  s.
That is, the change in energy for a system E can be represented by the equation
¢E  nhn

Energy can be gained or lost only in
integer multiples of h.
Planck’s constant  6.626  1034 J  s.

Sample Exercise 7.2

where n is an integer (1, 2, 3, . . .), h is Planck’s constant, and ␯ is the frequency of the
electromagnetic radiation absorbed or emitted.
Planck’s result was a real surprise. It had always been assumed that the energy of matter was continuous, which meant that the transfer of any quantity of energy was possible.
Now it seemed clear that energy is in fact quantized and can occur only in discrete units
of size h␯. Each of these small “packets” of energy is called a quantum. A system can
transfer energy only in whole quanta. Thus energy seems to have particulate properties.

The Energy of a Photon
The blue color in ﬁreworks is often achieved by heating copper(I) chloride (CuCl) to about
1200C. Then the compound emits blue light having a wavelength of 450 nm. What is the
increment of energy (the quantum) that is emitted at 4.50  102 nm by CuCl?
Solution
The quantum of energy can be calculated from the equation
¢E  hn
The frequency ␯ for this case can be calculated as follows:
n

c
2.9979  108 m/s

 6.66  1014 s1
l
4.50  107 m

So
¢E  hn  16.626  1034 J  s216.66  1014 s1 2  4.41  1019 J
A sample of CuCl emitting light at 450 nm can lose energy only in increments of 4.41 
1019 J, the size of the quantum in this case.
See Exercises 7.33 and 7.34.
The next important development in the knowledge of atomic structure came when Albert Einstein (see Fig. 7.3) proposed that electromagnetic radiation is itself quantized. Einstein suggested that electromagnetic radiation can be viewed as a stream of “particles”
called photons. The energy of each photon is given by the expression
Ephoton  hn 
Visualization: Photoelectric
Effect

hc
l

where h is Planck’s constant, ␯ is the frequency of the radiation, and ␭ is the wavelength
of the radiation.

FIGURE 7.3
Albert Einstein (1879–1955) was born in Germany. Nothing in his early development suggested genius; even at
the age of 9 he did not speak clearly, and his parents feared that he might be handicapped. When asked what
profession Einstein should follow, his school principal replied, “It doesn’t matter; he’ll never make a success of
anything.” When he was 10, Einstein entered the Luitpold Gymnasium (high school), which was typical of
German schools of that time in being harshly disciplinarian. There he developed a deep suspicion of authority
and a skepticism that encouraged him to question and doubt—valuable qualities in a scientist. In 1905, while
a patent clerk in Switzerland, Einstein published a paper explaining the photoelectric effect via the quantum
theory. For this revolutionary thinking he received a Nobel Prize in 1921. Highly regarded by this time, he
worked in Germany until 1933, when Hitler’s persecution of the Jews forced him to come to the United
States. He worked at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton, New Jersey, until his death in 1955.
Einstein was undoubtedly the greatest physicist of our age. Even if someone else had derived the
theory of relativity, his other work would have ensured his ranking as the second greatest physicist of his
time. Our concepts of space and time were radically changed by ideas he ﬁrst proposed when he was
26 years old. From then until the end of his life, he attempted unsuccessfully to ﬁnd a single unifying
theory that would explain all physical events.

The Photoelectric Effect
Einstein arrived at this conclusion through his analysis of the photoelectric effect (for
which he later was awarded the Nobel Prize). The photoelectric effect refers to the
phenomenon in which electrons are emitted from the surface of a metal when light strikes
it. The following observations characterize the photoelectric effect.
1. Studies in which the frequency of the light is varied show that no electrons are emitted
by a given metal below a speciﬁc threshold frequency ␯0.
2. For light with frequency lower than the threshold frequency, no electrons are emitted
regardless of the intensity of the light.
3. For light with frequency greater than the threshold frequency, the number of electrons
emitted increases with the intensity of the light.
4. For light with frequency greater than the threshold frequency, the kinetic energy, of
the emitted electrons increases linearly with the frequency of the light.
These observations can be explained by assuming that electromagnetic radiation is
quantized (consists of photons), and that the threshold frequency represents the minimum
energy required to remove the electron from the metal’s surface.
Minimum energy required to remove an electron  E0  h␯0
Because a photon with energy less than E0 (␯  ␯0) cannot remove an electron, light with
a frequency less than the threshold frequency produces no electrons. On the other hand,
for light where ␯  ␯0, the energy in excess of that required to remove the electron is
given to the electron as kinetic energy (KE):
KEelectron  12 my2  hn  hn0
h

A
Mass of
electron

h

h

h

Velocity Energy of Energy required
of
incident
to remove electron
electron photon
from metal’s surface

Because in this picture the intensity of light is a measure of the number of photons present in a given part of the beam, a greater intensity means that more photons are available
to release electrons (as long as ␯  ␯0 for the radiation).
In a related development, Einstein derived the famous equation
E  mc2
in his special theory of relativity published in 1905. The main signiﬁcance of this equation is
that energy has mass. This is more apparent if we rearrange the equation in the following form:
m Energy

h

h
Mass

E
c2

A

m

Speed of light

279

280

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Chemistry That Doesn’t Leave You in the Dark
n the animal world, the ability to see at night provides
predators with a distinct advantage over their prey. The
same advantage can be gained by military forces and law
enforcement agencies around the world through the use of
recent advances in night vision technology.
All types of night vision equipment are electro-optical devices that amplify existing light. A lens collects light and focuses it on an image intensiﬁer. The image intensiﬁer is based
on the photoelectric effect—materials that give off electrons
when light is shined on them. Night vision intensiﬁers use
semiconductor-based materials to produce large numbers of
electrons for a given input of photons. The emitted electrons
are then directed onto a screen covered with compounds that
phosphoresce (glow when struck by electrons). While television tubes use various phosphors to produce color pictures,
night vision devices use phosphors that appear green, because
the human eye can distinguish more shades of green than any
other color. The viewing screen shows an image that otherwise
would be invisible to the naked eye during nighttime viewing.
Current night vision devices use gallium arsenide
(GaAs)–based intensiﬁers that can amplify input light as
much as 50,000 times. These devices are so sensitive they
can use starlight to produce an image. It is also now possible to use light (infrared) that cannot be sensed with the
human eye to create an image.

I

This technology, while developed originally for military
and law enforcement applications, is now becoming available to the consumer. For example, Cadillac included night
vision as an option on its cars for the year 2000. As nightimaging technology improves and costs become less prohibitive, a whole new world is opening up for the technophile—
after the sun goes down.

A night vision photo of the midair refueling of a U.S.
Air Force plane.

Using this form of the equation, we can calculate the mass associated with a given quantity
of energy. For example, we can calculate the apparent mass of a photon. For electromagnetic
radiation of wavelength ␭, the energy of each photon is given by the expression
Note that the apparent mass of a photon
depends on its wavelength. The mass of
a photon at rest is thought to be zero,
although we never observe it at rest.

Ephoton 

hc
l

Then the apparent mass of a photon of light with wavelength ␭ is given by
m

hc l
h
E
 2 
lc
c2
c

Does a photon really have mass? The answer appears to be yes. In 1922 American
physicist Arthur Compton (1892–1962) performed experiments involving collisions of X
rays and electrons that showed that photons do exhibit the apparent mass calculated from
the preceding equation. However, it is clear that photons do not have mass in the classical sense. A photon has mass only in a relativistic sense—it has no rest mass.
Light as a wave phenomenon

Light as a stream of photons

FIGURE 7.4
Electromagnetic radiation exhibits wave properties and particulate properties. The energy of each photon
of the radiation is related to the wavelength and frequency by the equation Ephoton  h  hc.

7.2 The Nature of Matter

281

We can summarize the important conclusions from the work of Planck and Einstein
as follows:
Energy is quantized. It can occur only in discrete units called quanta.
Electromagnetic radiation, which was previously thought to exhibit only wave properties, seems to show certain characteristics of particulate matter as well. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as the dual nature of light and is illustrated in Fig. 7.4.

Do not confuse  (frequency) with ␷
(velocity).

Thus light, which previously was thought to be purely wavelike, was found to have
certain characteristics of particulate matter. But is the opposite also true? That is, does
matter that is normally assumed to be particulate exhibit wave properties? This question
was raised in 1923 by a young French physicist named Louis de Broglie (1892–1987). To
see how de Broglie supplied the answer to this question, recall that the relationship between
mass and wavelength for electromagnetic radiation is m  h␭c. For a particle with
velocity ␷, the corresponding expression is
m

h
ly

l

h
my

Rearranging to solve for ␭, we have

This equation, called de Broglie’s equation, allows us to calculate the wavelength for a
particle, as shown in Sample Exercise 7.3.
Sample Exercise 7.3

Calculations of Wavelength
Compare the wavelength for an electron (mass  9.11  1031 kg) traveling at a speed
of 1.0  107 m/s with that for a ball (mass  0.10 kg) traveling at 35 m/s.
Solution
We use the equation ␭  hm␷, where
h  6.626  1034 J  s or 6.626  1034 kg  m2/s
since
1 J  1 kg  m2/s2
For the electron,
kg  m  m
s
 7.27  1011 m
le 
31
19.11  10 kg211.0  107 m/s2
6.626  1034

For the ball,
kg  m  m
s
 1.9  1034 m
10.10 kg2135 m/s2

6.626  1034
lb 

See Exercises 7.41 through 7.44.
Notice from Sample Exercise 7.3 that the wavelength associated with the ball is incredibly short. On the other hand, the wavelength of the electron, although still quite small,
happens to be on the same order as the spacing between the atoms in a typical crystal.
This is important because, as we will see presently, it provides a means for testing de
Broglie’s equation.

282

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Thin Is In
ince the beginning of television about 75 years ago, TV
sets have been built around cathode ray tubes (CRTs) in
which a “gun” ﬁres electrons at a screen containing phosphors
(compounds that emit colored light when excited by some energy source). Although CRT televisions produce excellent pictures, big-screen TVs are very thick and very heavy. Several
new technologies are now being used that reduce the bulk of
color monitors. One such approach involves a plasma ﬂatpanel display. As the name suggests, the major advantage of
these screens is that they are very thin and relatively light.
All color monitors work by manipulating millions of
pixels, each of which contains red, blue, and green colorproducing phosphors. By combining these three fundamental colors with various weightings, all colors of the rainbow
can be generated, thereby producing color images on the
monitor. The various types of monitors differ in the energy
source used to excite the phosphors. Whereas a CRT monitor
uses an electron gun as the energy source, a plasma monitor

S

uses an applied voltage to produce gas-phase ions and electrons, which, when they recombine, emit ultraviolet light.
This light, in turn, excites the phosphors.
Plasma monitors have pixel compartments that contain
xenon and neon gas. Each pixel consists of three subpixels:
one containing a red phosphor, one with a green phosphor,
and one with a blue phosphor. Two perpendicular sets of
electrodes deﬁne a matrix around the subpixels:

Electrodes

Electrodes

Diffraction results when light is scattered from a regular array of points or lines.
You may have noticed the diffraction of light from the ridges and grooves of a compact disc. The colors result because the various wavelengths of visible light are not all
scattered in the same way. The colors are “separated,” giving the same effect as light
passing through a prism. Just as a regular arrangement of ridges and grooves produces
diffraction, so does a regular array of atoms or ions in a crystal, as shown in the
photographs below. For example, when X rays are directed onto a crystal of sodium
chloride, with its regular array of Na and Cl ions, the scattered radiation produces
a diffraction pattern of bright spots and dark areas on a photographic plate, as shown
in Fig. 7.5(a). This occurs because the scattered light can interfere constructively (the
peaks and troughs of the beams are in phase) to produce a bright spot [Fig. 7.5(b)]
or destructively (the peaks and troughs are out of phase) to produce a dark area
[Fig. 7.5(c)].
A diffraction pattern can only be explained in terms of waves. Thus this phenomenon provides a test for the postulate that particles such as electrons have wavelengths.
As we saw in Sample Exercise 7.3, an electron with a velocity of 107 m/s (easily achieved
by acceleration of the electron in an electric ﬁeld) has a wavelength of about 1010 m,
which is roughly the distance between the ions in a crystal such as sodium chloride.
This is important because diffraction occurs most efﬁciently when the spacing between
the scattering points is about the same as the wavelength of the wave being diffracted.
Thus, if electrons really do have an associated wavelength, a crystal should diffract
electrons. An experiment to test this idea was carried out in 1927 by C. J. Davisson and
(top) The pattern produced by electron diffraction of a titanium/nickel alloy. (bottom) Pattern produced
by X-ray diffraction of a beryl crystal.

7.2 The Nature of Matter

One set of the electrodes is above the pixels, and the
perpendicular set is below the pixels. When the computer
managing the image places a voltage difference across a
given subpixel, electrons are removed from the xenon and
neon atoms present to form a plasma (cations and electrons). When the cations recombine with the electrons, photons of light are emitted that are absorbed by the phosphor
compound, which then emits red, green, or blue light. By
controlling the size of the voltage on a given subpixel,
a given pixel can produce a variety of colors. When all
of the pixels are excited appropriately, a color image is
produced.
The plasma display makes it possible to have a large,
yet relatively thin screen. Since each pixel is energized individually, this display looks bright and clear from almost
any angle. The main disadvantage of this technology is its
relatively high cost. However, as advances are being made,
the price is falling signiﬁcantly. CRT monitors may soon be
of interest only to antique collectors.

283

A plasma display from Sony.

L. H. Germer at Bell Laboratories. When they directed a beam of electrons at a nickel
crystal, they observed a diffraction pattern similar to that seen from the diffraction of
X rays. This result veriﬁed de Broglie’s relationship, at least for electrons. Larger chunks
of matter, such as balls, have such small wavelengths (see Sample Exercise 7.3) that
they are impossible to verify experimentally. However, we believe that all matter obeys
de Broglie’s equation.
Now we have come full circle. Electromagnetic radiation, which at the turn of the twentieth century was thought to be a pure waveform, was found to possess particulate properties.
Conversely, electrons, which were thought to be particles, were found to have a wavelength
associated with them. The signiﬁcance of these results is that matter and energy are not distinct.

Destructive interference
Trough

Constructive interference
X rays
NaCl
crystal
Detector
screen
(a)

Diffraction
pattern on detector
screen (front view)

Waves in phase
(peaks on one wave
match peaks on the
other wave)
(b)

Increased intensity
(bright spot)

Peak
Waves out of phase
(troughs and peaks
coincide)
(c)

Decreased intensity
(dark spot)

FIGURE 7.5
(a) Diffraction occurs when electromagnetic radiation is scattered from a regular array of objects, such as
the ions in a crystal of sodium chloride. The large spot in the center is from the main incident beam of
X rays. (b) Bright spots in the diffraction pattern result from constructive interference of waves. The waves
are in phase; that is, their peaks match. (c) Dark areas result from destructive interference of waves. The
waves are out of phase; the peaks of one wave coincide with the troughs of another wave.

284

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
Energy is really a form of matter, and all matter shows the same types of properties. That is,
all matter exhibits both particulate and wave properties. Large pieces of matter, such as baseballs, exhibit predominantly particulate properties. The associated wavelength is so small that
it is not observed. Very small “bits of matter,” such as photons, while showing some particulate properties, exhibit predominantly wave properties. Pieces of matter with intermediate mass,
such as electrons, show clearly both the particulate and wave properties of matter.

7.3

The Atomic Spectrum of Hydrogen

As we saw in Chapter 2, key information about the atom came from several experiments
carried out in the early twentieth century, in particular Thomson’s discovery of the electron and Rutherford’s discovery of the nucleus. Another important experiment was the
study of the emission of light by excited hydrogen atoms. When a sample of hydrogen
gas receives a high-energy spark, the H2 molecules absorb energy, and some of the HOH
bonds are broken. The resulting hydrogen atoms are excited; that is, they contain excess
energy, which they release by emitting light of various wavelengths to produce what is
called the emission spectrum of the hydrogen atom.
To understand the signiﬁcance of the hydrogen emission spectrum, we must ﬁrst describe the continuous spectrum that results when white light is passed through a prism,
as shown in Fig. 7.6(a). This spectrum, like the rainbow produced when sunlight is

Continuous
spectrum

Prism

Slit

VI B
G Y O
R

+

A beautiful rainbow.

Visualization: Refraction of
White Light

Detector
(photographic plate)

–

Electric arc
(white light
source)
(a)

Visualization: The Line
Spectrum of Hydrogen
+

Arc

Detector
(photographic plate)
Prism

Slit

High
voltage

Visualization: Flame Tests
FIGURE 7.6
(a) A continuous spectrum containing all
wavelengths of visible light (indicated by
the initial letters of the colors of the rainbow). (b) The hydrogen line spectrum contains only a few discrete wavelengths.
Spectrum adapted by permission from C. W. Keenan,
D. C. Kleinfelter, and J. H. Wood, General College
Chemistry, 6th ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1980).

–

Hydrogen gas
discharge tube

410 nm 434 nm
(b)

486 nm

656 nm

7.4 The Bohr Model

∆ E3 = hc
λ3
∆ E2 = hc
λ2

E

∆ E1 = hc
λ1
Various energy levels
in the hydrogen atom

FIGURE 7.7
A change between two discrete energy
levels emits a photon of light.

285

dispersed by raindrops, contains all the wavelengths of visible light. In contrast, when the
hydrogen emission spectrum in the visible region is passed through a prism, as shown in
Fig. 7.6(b), we see only a few lines, each of which corresponds to a discrete wavelength.
The hydrogen emission spectrum is called a line spectrum.
What is the signiﬁcance of the line spectrum of hydrogen? It indicates that only certain energies are allowed for the electron in the hydrogen atom. In other words, the energy of the electron in the hydrogen atom is quantized. This observation ties in perfectly
with the postulates of Max Planck discussed in Section 7.2. Changes in energy between
discrete energy levels in hydrogen will produce only certain wavelengths of emitted light,
as shown in Fig. 7.7. For example, a given change in energy from a high to a lower level
would give a wavelength of light that can be calculated from Planck’s equation:

Change in
energy

m8

m8

¢E  hn 

hc
l m88

Wavelength of light
emitted

Frequency of
light emitted

The discrete line spectrum of hydrogen shows that only certain energies are possible; that
is, the electron energy levels are quantized. In contrast, if any energy level were allowed,
the emission spectrum would be continuous.
n

7.4

5
4
3
2

The Bohr Model

In 1913, a Danish physicist named Niels Bohr (1885–1962), aware of the experimental
results we have just discussed, developed a quantum model for the hydrogen atom. Bohr
proposed that the electron in a hydrogen atom moves around the nucleus only in certain
allowed circular orbits. He calculated the radii for these allowed orbits by using the theories of classical physics and by making some new assumptions.
From classical physics Bohr knew that a particle in motion tends to move in a straight
line and can be made to travel in a circle only by application of a force toward the center of the circle. Thus Bohr reasoned that the tendency of the revolving electron to ﬂy off
the atom must be just balanced by its attraction for the positively charged nucleus. But
classical physics also decreed that a charged particle under acceleration should radiate energy. Since an electron revolving around the nucleus constantly changes its direction, it
is constantly accelerating. Therefore, the electron should emit light and lose energy—and
thus be drawn into the nucleus. This, of course, does not correlate with the existence of
stable atoms.
Clearly, an atomic model based solely on the theories of classical physics was untenable. Bohr also knew that the correct model had to account for the experimental spectrum of hydrogen, which showed that only certain electron energies were allowed. The
experimental data were absolutely clear on this point. Bohr found that his model would
ﬁt the experimental results if he assumed that the angular momentum of the electron (angular momentum equals the product of mass, velocity, and orbital radius) could occur only
in certain increments. It was not clear why this should be true, but with this assumption,
Bohr’s model gave hydrogen atom energy levels consistent with the hydrogen emission
spectrum. The model is represented pictorially in Fig. 7.8.

E

1
(a)
n=5
n=4
n=3
n=2
n=1

(b)

Line
spectrum
Wavelength
(c)

FIGURE 7.8
Electronic transitions in the Bohr model for the hydrogen atom. (a) An energy-level diagram for electronic transitions. (b) An orbit-transition diagram, which accounts for the experimental spectrum. (Note
that the orbits shown are schematic. They are not drawn to scale.) (c) The resulting line spectrum on a
photographic plate. Note that the lines in the visible region of the spectrum correspond to transitions
from higher levels to the n  2 level.

286

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

The J in Equation (7.1) stands for joules.

Although we will not show the derivation here, the most important equation to come
from Bohr’s model is the expression for the energy levels available to the electron in the
hydrogen atom:
E  2.178  1018 Ja

Z2
b
n2

(7.1)

in which n is an integer (the larger the value of n, the larger is the orbit radius) and Z is
the nuclear charge. Using Equation (7.1), Bohr was able to calculate hydrogen atom energy levels that exactly matched the values obtained by experiment.
The negative sign in Equation (7.1) simply means that the energy of the
electron bound to the nucleus is lower than it would be if the electron were at an inﬁnite
distance (n  q ) from the nucleus, where there is no interaction and the energy is
zero:
E  2.178  1018 Ja

Niels Hendrik David Bohr (1885–1962) as a
boy lived in the shadow of his younger
brother Harald, who played on the 1908
Danish Olympic Soccer Team and later
became a distinguished mathematician. In
school, Bohr received his poorest marks in
composition and struggled with writing
during his entire life. In fact, he wrote so
poorly that he was forced to dictate his
Ph.D. thesis to his mother. Nevertheless,
Bohr was a brilliant physicist. After receiving his Ph.D. in Denmark, he constructed a
quantum model for the hydrogen atom by
the time he was 27. Even though his model
later proved to be incorrect, Bohr remained
a central ﬁgure in the drive to understand
the atom. He was awarded the Nobel Prize
in physics in 1922.

Z2
b0
q

The energy of the electron in any orbit is negative relative to this reference state.
Equation (7.1) can be used to calculate the change in energy of an electron when the
electron changes orbits. For example, suppose an electron in level n  6 of an excited hydrogen atom falls back to level n  1 as the hydrogen atom returns to its lowest possible
energy state, its ground state. We use Equation (7.1) with Z  1, since the hydrogen
nucleus contains a single proton. The energies corresponding to the two states are as
follows:
For n  6:
For n  1:

12
b  6.050  1020 J
62
12
E1  2.178  10 18 Ja 2 b  2.178  1018 J
1
E6  2.178  10 18 Ja

Note that for n  1 the electron has a more negative energy than it does for n  6, which
means that the electron is more tightly bound in the smallest allowed orbit.
The change in energy E when the electron falls from n  6 to n  1 is
¢E  energy of final state  energy of initial state
 E1  E6  12.178  1018 J2  16.050  1020 J2
 2.117  1018 J
The negative sign for the change in energy indicates that the atom has lost energy and is
now in a more stable state. The energy is carried away from the atom by the production
(emission) of a photon.
The wavelength of the emitted photon can be calculated from the equation
c
¢E  h a b
l

or l 

hc
¢E

where E represents the change in energy of the atom, which equals the energy of the
emitted photon. We have
l

16.626  1034 J  s212.9979  108 m/s2
hc

 9.383  108 m
¢E
2.117  1018 J

Note that for this calculation the absolute value of E is used (we have not included the
negative sign). In this case we indicate the direction of energy ﬂow by saying that a photon

7.4 The Bohr Model

287

of wavelength 9.383  108 m has been emitted from the hydrogen atom. Simply plugging the negative value of E into the equation would produce a negative value for ␭,
which is physically meaningless.
Sample Exercise 7.4

Energy Quantization in Hydrogen
Calculate the energy required to excite the hydrogen electron from level n  1 to level
n  2. Also calculate the wavelength of light that must be absorbed by a hydrogen atom
in its ground state to reach this excited state.*
Solution
Using Equation (7.1) with Z  1, we have
12
b  2.178  1018 J
12
12
E2  2.178  1018 Ja 2 b  5.445  1019 J
2
¢E  E2  E1  15.445  1019 J2  12.178  1018 J2  1.633  1018 J
E1  2.178  1018 Ja

The positive value for E indicates that the system has gained energy. The wavelength of
light that must be absorbed to produce this change is
Note from Fig. 7.2 that the light required
to produce the transition from the n  1
to n  2 level in hydrogen lies in the
ultraviolet region.

16.626  1034 J  s212.9979  108 m/s2
hc

¢E
1.633  1018 J
 1.216  107 m

l

See Exercises 7.45 and 7.46.
At this time we must emphasize two important points about the Bohr model:
1. The model correctly ﬁts the quantized energy levels of the hydrogen atom and postulates only certain allowed circular orbits for the electron.
2. As the electron becomes more tightly bound, its energy becomes more negative relative to the zero-energy reference state (corresponding to the electron being at inﬁnite
distance from the nucleus). As the electron is brought closer to the nucleus, energy
is released from the system.
Using Equation (7.1), we can derive a general equation for the electron moving from
one level (ninitial) to another level (nfinal):
¢E  energy of level nfinal  energy of level ninitial
 Efinal  Einitial
12
12
18
 12.178  1018 J2 a
J2 a
b
2 b  12.178  10
nfinal
ninitial2
1
1
 2.178  1018 Ja
b
2 
nfinal
ninitial2

(7.2)

Equation (7.2) can be used to calculate the energy change between any two energy
levels in a hydrogen atom, as shown in Sample Exercise 7.5.

*After this exercise we will no longer show cancellation marks. However, the same process for canceling
units applies throughout this text.

288

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Fireworks
he art of using mixtures of chemicals to produce explosives is an ancient one. Black powder—a mixture of
potassium nitrate, charcoal, and sulfur—was being used in
China well before 1000 A.D. and has been used subsequently
through the centuries in military explosives, in construction
blasting, and for ﬁreworks. The DuPont Company, now a
major chemical manufacturer, started out as a manufacturer
of black powder. In fact, the founder, Eleuthère duPont,
learned the manufacturing technique from none other than
Lavoisier.
Before the nineteenth century, ﬁreworks were conﬁned
mainly to rockets and loud bangs. Orange and yellow
colors came from the presence of charcoal and iron ﬁlings.
However, with the great advances in chemistry in the
nineteenth century, new compounds found their way into
ﬁreworks. Salts of copper, strontium, and barium added
brilliant colors. Magnesium and aluminum metals gave a
dazzling white light. Fireworks, in fact, have changed very
little since then.
How do ﬁreworks produce their brilliant colors and loud
bangs? Actually, only a handful of different chemicals are
responsible for most of the spectacular effects. To produce
the noise and ﬂashes, an oxidizer (an oxidizing agent) and
a fuel (a reducing agent) are used. A common mixture involves potassium perchlorate (KClO4) as the oxidizer and
aluminum and sulfur as the fuel. The perchlorate oxidizes
the fuel in a very exothermic reaction, which produces a brilliant ﬂash, due to the aluminum, and a loud report from the
rapidly expanding gases produced. For a color effect, an element with a colored emission spectrum is included. Recall
that the electrons in atoms can be raised to higher-energy
orbitals when the atoms absorb energy. The excited atoms
can then release this excess energy by emitting light of speciﬁc wavelengths, often in the visible region. In ﬁreworks,
the energy to excite the electrons comes from the reaction
between the oxidizer and fuel.
Yellow colors in ﬁreworks are due to the 589-nm emission of sodium ions. Red colors come from strontium salts
emitting at 606 nm and from 636 to 688 nm. This red color
is familiar from highway safety ﬂares. Barium salts give a
green color in ﬁreworks, due to a series of emission lines

T

Twine

A typical aerial shell used in ﬁreworks displays. Time-delayed fuses
cause a shell to explode in stages. In this case a red starburst occurs
ﬁrst, followed by a blue starburst, and ﬁnally a ﬂash and loud report.
(Reprinted with permission from Chemical & Engineering News, June 29, 1981, p. 24.
Copyright © 1981, American Chemical Society.)

between 505 and 535 nm. A really good blue color, however,
is hard to obtain. Copper salts give a blue color, emitting in
the 420- to 460-nm region. But difﬁculties occur because the
oxidizing agent, potassium chlorate (KClO3), reacts with
copper salts to form copper chlorate, a highly explosive compound that is dangerous to store. (The use of KClO3 in ﬁreworks has been largely abandoned because of its explosive
hazards.) Paris green, a copper salt containing arsenic, was
once used extensively but is now considered to be too toxic.
In recent years the colors produced by ﬁreworks have
become more intense because of the formation of metal chlorides during the burning process. These gaseous metal chloride molecules produce colors much more brilliant than do
the metal atoms by themselves. For example, strontium chloride produces a much brighter red than do strontium atoms.

7.4 The Bohr Model

Thus, chlorine-donating compounds are now included in
many ﬁreworks shells.
A typical aerial shell is shown in the diagram. The
shell is launched from a mortar (a steel cylinder) using
black powder as the propellant. Time-delayed fuses are
used to ﬁre the shell in stages. A list of chemicals commonly used in ﬁreworks is given in the table.
Although you might think that the chemistry of
ﬁreworks is simple, the achievement of the vivid white
ﬂashes and the brilliant colors requires complex combinations of chemicals. For example, because the white
ﬂashes produce high ﬂame temperatures, the colors tend
to wash out. Thus oxidizers such as KClO4 are commonly
used with fuels that produce relatively low ﬂame temperatures. An added difﬁculty, however, is that perchlorates are very sensitive to accidental ignition and are
therefore quite hazardous. Another problem arises from
the use of sodium salts. Because sodium produces an extremely bright yellow emission, sodium salts cannot be
used when other colors are desired. Carbon-based fuels
also give a yellow ﬂame that masks other colors, and this
limits the use of organic compounds as fuels. You can see
that the manufacture of ﬁreworks that produce the desired effects and are also safe to handle requires careful
selection of chemicals. And, of course, there is still the
dream of a deep blue ﬂame.

Fireworks in Washington, D.C.

Chemicals Commonly Used in the Manufacture of Fireworks
Oxidizers

Fuels

Special Effects

Potassium nitrate
Potassium chlorate
Potassium perchlorate
Ammonium perchlorate
Barium nitrate
Barium chlorate
Strontium nitrate

Aluminum
Magnesium
Titanium
Charcoal
Sulfur
Antimony sulﬁde
Dextrin
Red gum
Polyvinyl chloride

Red ﬂame: strontium nitrate, strontium carbonate
Green ﬂame: barium nitrate, barium chlorate
Blue ﬂame: copper carbonate, copper sulfate, copper oxide
Yellow ﬂame: sodium oxalate, cryolite (Na3AlF6)
White ﬂame: magnesium, aluminum
Gold sparks: iron ﬁlings, charcoal
White sparks: aluminum, magnesium, aluminum–magnesium alloy, titanium
Whistle effect: potassium benzoate or sodium salicylate
White smoke: mixture of potassium nitrate and sulfur
Colored smoke: mixture of potassium chlorate, sulfur, and organic dye

289

290

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

Sample Exercise 7.5

Electron Energies
Calculate the energy required to remove the electron from a hydrogen atom in its ground
state.
Solution
Removing the electron from a hydrogen atom in its ground state corresponds to taking
the electron from ninitial  1 to nfinal  q. Thus
1
1

b
nfinal2
ninitial2
1
1
 2.178  1018 Ja  2 b
q
1

¢E  2.178  1018 Ja

Visualization: Flame Tests

 2.178  1018 J10  12  2.178  1018 J
The energy required to remove the electron from a hydrogen atom in its ground state is
2.178  1018 J.
See Exercises 7.51 and 7.52.
Although Bohr’s model ﬁts the energy
levels for hydrogen, it is a fundamentally
incorrect model for the hydrogen atom.

Unplucked string

At ﬁrst Bohr’s model appeared to be very promising. The energy levels calculated by
Bohr closely agreed with the values obtained from the hydrogen emission spectrum. However, when Bohr’s model was applied to atoms other than hydrogen, it did not work at all.
Although some attempts were made to adapt the model using elliptical orbits, it was concluded that Bohr’s model is fundamentally incorrect. The model is, however, very important historically, because it showed that the observed quantization of energy in atoms
could be explained by making rather simple assumptions. Bohr’s model paved the way
for later theories. It is important to realize, however, that the current theory of atomic
structure is in no way derived from the Bohr model. Electrons do not move around the
nucleus in circular orbits, as we shall see later in this chapter.

1 half-wavelength

7.5
2 half-wavelengths

3 half-wavelengths

FIGURE 7.9
The standing waves caused by the vibration
of a guitar string fastened at both ends.
Each dot represents a node (a point of zero
displacement).

Wave-generating apparatus.

The Quantum Mechanical Model of the Atom

By the mid-1920s it had become apparent that the Bohr model could not be made to work.
A totally new approach was needed. Three physicists were at the forefront of this effort:
Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976), Louis de Broglie (1892–1987), and Erwin Schrödinger
(1887–1961). The approach they developed became known as wave mechanics or, more
commonly, quantum mechanics. As we have already seen, de Broglie originated the idea
that the electron, previously considered to be a particle, also shows wave properties.
Pursuing this line of reasoning, Schrödinger, an Austrian physicist, decided to attack the
problem of atomic structure by giving emphasis to the wave properties of the electron. To
Schrödinger and de Broglie, the electron bound to the nucleus seemed similar to a standing wave, and they began research on a wave mechanical description of the atom.
The most familiar example of standing waves occurs in association with musical
instruments such as guitars or violins, where a string attached at both ends vibrates to produce a musical tone. The waves are described as “standing” because they are stationary;

7.5 The Quantum Mechanical Model of the Atom

n=4

(a)

n=5

(b)

Mismatch
n = 4 13
(c)

FIGURE 7.10
The hydrogen electron visualized as a
standing wave around the nucleus. The
circumference of a particular circular orbit
would have to correspond to a whole
number of wavelengths, as shown in
(a) and (b), or else destructive interference
occurs, as shown in (c). This is consistent
with the fact that only certain electron
energies are allowed; the atom is quantized.
(Although this idea encouraged scientists to
use a wave theory, it does not mean that
the electron really travels in circular orbits.)

291

the waves do not travel along the length of the string. The motions of the string can be
explained as a combination of simple waves of the type shown in Fig. 7.9. The dots in
this ﬁgure indicate the nodes, or points of zero lateral (sideways) displacement, for a given
wave. Note that there are limitations on the allowed wavelengths of the standing wave.
Each end of the string is ﬁxed, so there is always a node at each end. This means that
there must be a whole number of half wavelengths in any of the allowed motions of the
string (see Fig. 7.9). Standing waves can be illustrated using the wave generator shown
in the photo below.
A similar situation results when the electron in the hydrogen atom is imagined to be
a standing wave. As shown in Fig. 7.10, only certain circular orbits have a circumference
into which a whole number of wavelengths of the standing electron wave will “ﬁt.” All
other orbits would produce destructive interference of the standing electron wave and are
not allowed. This seemed like a possible explanation for the observed quantization of the
hydrogen atom, so Schrödinger worked out a model for the hydrogen atom in which the
electron was assumed to behave as a standing wave.
It is important to recognize that Schrödinger could not be sure that this idea would
work. The test had to be whether or not the model would correctly ﬁt the experimental
data on hydrogen and other atoms. The physical principles for describing standing waves
were well known in 1925 when Schrödinger decided to treat the electron in this way. His
mathematical treatment is too complicated to be detailed here. However, the form of
Schrödinger’s equation is
Ĥc  Ec
where ␺, called the wave function, is a function of the coordinates (x, y, and z) of the
electron’s position in three-dimensional space and Ĥ represents a set of mathematical instructions called an operator. In this case, the operator contains mathematical terms that
produce the total energy of the atom when they are applied to the wave function. E represents the total energy of the atom (the sum of the potential energy due to the attraction
between the proton and electron and the kinetic energy of the moving electron). When
this equation is analyzed, many solutions are found. Each solution consists of a wave function ␺ that is characterized by a particular value of E. A speciﬁc wave function is often
called an orbital.
To illustrate the most important ideas of the quantum (wave) mechanical model of
the atom, we will ﬁrst concentrate on the wave function corresponding to the lowest energy for the hydrogen atom. This wave function is called the 1s orbital. The ﬁrst point of
interest is to explore the meaning of the word orbital. As we will see, this is not a trivial
matter. One thing is clear: An orbital is not a Bohr orbit. The electron in the hydrogen 1s
orbital is not moving around the nucleus in a circular orbit. How, then, is the electron
moving? The answer is quite surprising: We do not know. The wave function gives us no
information about the detailed pathway of the electron. This is somewhat disturbing. When
we solve problems involving the motions of particles in the macroscopic world, we are
able to predict their pathways. For example, when two billiard balls with known velocities collide, we can predict their motions after the collision. However, we cannot predict
the electron’s motion from the 1s orbital function. Does this mean that the theory is wrong?
Not necessarily: We have already learned that an electron does not behave much like a
billiard ball, so we must examine the situation closely before we discard the theory.
To help us understand the nature of an orbital, we need to consider a principle discovered by Werner Heisenberg, one of the primary developers of quantum mechanics.
Heisenberg’s mathematical analysis led him to a surprising conclusion: There is a fundamental limitation to just how precisely we can know both the position and momentum of
a particle at a given time. This is a statement of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Stated mathematically, the uncertainty principle is
¢x  ¢1my2 

h
4p

292

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
where x is the uncertainty in a particle’s position, (m) is the uncertainty in a particle’s
momentum, and h is Planck’s constant. Thus the minimum uncertainty in the product
¢  ¢ 1my2 is h4␲. What this equation really says is that the more accurately we know
a particle’s position, the less accurately we can know its momentum, and vice versa. This
limitation is so small for large particles such as baseballs or billiard balls that it is unnoticed. However, for a small particle such as the electron, the limitation becomes quite important. Applied to the electron, the uncertainty principle implies that we cannot know the
exact motion of the electron as it moves around the nucleus. It is therefore not appropriate to assume that the electron is moving around the nucleus in a well-deﬁned orbit, as in
the Bohr model.

The Physical Meaning of a Wave Function

Probability is the likelihood, or odds, that
something will occur.

Given the limitations indicated by the uncertainty principle, what then is the physical
meaning of a wave function for an electron? That is, what is an atomic orbital? Although
the wave function itself has no easily visualized meaning, the square of the function does
have a deﬁnite physical signiﬁcance. The square of the function indicates the probability
of ﬁnding an electron near a particular point in space. For example, suppose we have
two positions in space, one deﬁned by the coordinates x1, y1, and z1 and the other by the
coordinates x2, y2, and z2. The relative probability of ﬁnding the electron at positions 1
and 2 is given by substituting the values of x, y, and z for the two positions into the wave
function, squaring the function value, and computing the following ratio:
3c1x1, y1, z1 2 4 2
3c1x2, y2, z2 2 4 2

Probability (R2 )

(a)

Distance from nucleus (r)
(b)

FIGURE 7.11
(a) The probability distribution for the
hydrogen 1s orbital in three-dimensional
space. (b) The probability of ﬁnding the
electron at points along a line drawn from
the nucleus outward in any direction for
the hydrogen 1s orbital.



N1
N2

The quotient N1N2 is the ratio of the probabilities of ﬁnding the electron at positions
1 and 2. For example, if the value of the ratio N1N2 is 100, the electron is 100 times
more likely to be found at position 1 than at position 2. The model gives no information
concerning when the electron will be at either position or how it moves between the
positions. This vagueness is consistent with the concept of the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle.
The square of the wave function is most conveniently represented as a probability
distribution, in which the intensity of color is used to indicate the probability value near
a given point in space. The probability distribution for the hydrogen 1s wave function (orbital) is shown in Fig. 7.11(a). The best way to think about this diagram is as a threedimensional time exposure with the electron as a tiny moving light. The more times the
electron visits a particular point, the darker the negative becomes. Thus the darkness of a
point indicates the probability of ﬁnding an electron at that position. This diagram is also
known as an electron density map; electron density and electron probability mean the
same thing. When a chemist uses the term atomic orbital, he or she is probably picturing
an electron density map of this type.
Another way of representing the electron probability distribution for the 1s wave function is to calculate the probability at points along a line drawn outward in any direction
from the nucleus. The result is shown in Fig. 7.11(b). Note that the probability of ﬁnding
the electron at a particular position is greatest close to the nucleus and drops off rapidly
as the distance from the nucleus increases. We are also interested in knowing the total
probability of ﬁnding the electron in the hydrogen atom at a particular distance from the
nucleus. Imagine that the space around the hydrogen nucleus is made up of a series of
thin spherical shells (rather like layers in an onion), as shown in Fig. 7.12(a). When the
total probability of ﬁnding the electron in each spherical shell is plotted versus the distance
from the nucleus, the plot in Fig. 7.12(b) is obtained. This graph is called the radial
probability distribution.
The maximum in the curve occurs because of two opposing effects. The probability
of ﬁnding an electron at a particular position is greatest near the nucleus, but the volume

FIGURE 7.12
(a) Cross section of the hydrogen 1s orbital
probability distribution divided into
successive thin spherical shells. (b) The
radial probability distribution. A plot of the
total probability of ﬁnding the electron in
each thin spherical shell as a function of
distance from the nucleus.

1 Å  1010 m; the angstrom is most
often used as the unit for atomic radius
because of its convenient size. Another
convenient unit is the picometer:
1 pm  1012 m

Visualization: 1s Orbital

293

Radial probability (4πr 2 R2 )

7.6 Quantum Numbers

Distance from nucleus (r)
(a)

(b)

of the spherical shell increases with distance from the nucleus. Therefore, as we move
away from the nucleus, the probability of ﬁnding the electron at a given position decreases,
but we are summing more positions. Thus the total probability increases to a certain radius
and then decreases as the electron probability at each position becomes very small. For
the hydrogen 1s orbital, the maximum radial probability (the distance at which the electron is most likely to be found) occurs at a distance of 5.29  102 nm or 0.529 Å from
the nucleus. Interestingly, this is exactly the radius of the innermost orbit in the Bohr
model. Note that in Bohr’s model the electron is assumed to have a circular path and so
is always found at this distance. In the quantum mechanical model, the speciﬁc electron
motions are unknown, and this is the most probable distance at which the electron is found.
One more characteristic of the hydrogen 1s orbital that we must consider is its size.
As we can see from Fig. 7.11, the size of this orbital cannot be deﬁned precisely, since
the probability never becomes zero (although it drops to an extremely small value at large
values of r). So, in fact, the hydrogen 1s orbital has no distinct size. However, it is useful to have a deﬁnition of relative orbital size. The deﬁnition most often used by chemists
to describe the size of the hydrogen 1s orbital is the radius of the sphere that encloses
90% of the total electron probability. That is, 90% of the time the electron is inside this
sphere.
So far we have described only the lowest-energy wave function in the hydrogen atom,
the 1s orbital. Hydrogen has many other orbitals, which we will describe in the next
section. However, before we proceed, we should summarize what we have said about the
meaning of an atomic orbital. An orbital is difﬁcult to deﬁne precisely at an introductory
level. Technically, an orbital is a wave function. However, it is usually most helpful to
picture an orbital as a three-dimensional electron density map. That is, an electron “in” a
particular atomic orbital is assumed to exhibit the electron probability indicated by the
orbital map.

7.6

Quantum Numbers

When we solve the Schrödinger equation for the hydrogen atom, we ﬁnd many wave functions (orbitals) that satisfy it. Each of these orbitals is characterized by a series of numbers called quantum numbers, which describe various properties of the orbital:
The principal quantum number (n) has integral values: 1, 2, 3, . . . . The principal
quantum number is related to the size and energy of the orbital. As n increases, the
orbital becomes larger and the electron spends more time farther from the nucleus.
An increase in n also means higher energy, because the electron is less tightly bound
to the nucleus, and the energy is less negative.
The angular momentum quantum number (ᐉ) has integral values from 0 to n  1
for each value of n. This quantum number is related to the shape of atomic orbitals.
The value of ᐉ for a particular orbital is commonly assigned a letter: ᐉ  0 is called s;

294

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

TABLE 7.1 The Angular Momentum Quantum Numbers and
Corresponding Letters Used to Designate Atomic Orbitals

Number of Orbitals per Subshell
s1
p 3
d5
f 7
g9

Value of /

0

1

2

3

4

Letter Used

s

p

d

f

g

TABLE 7.2 Quantum Numbers for the First Four Levels of Orbitals in the
Hydrogen Atom
n

/

Orbital
Designation

m/

Number of Orbitals

1

0

1s

0

1

2

0
1

2s
2p

0
1, 0, 1

1
3

3

0
1
2

3s
3p
3d

0
1, 0, 1
2, 1, 0, 1, 2

1
3
5

4

0
1
2
3

4s
4p
4d
4f

0
1, 0, 1
2, 1, 0, 1, 2
3, 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, 3

1
3
5
7

ᐉ  1 is called p; ᐉ  2 is called d; ᐉ  3 is called f. This system arises from early
spectral studies and is summarized in Table 7.1.
The magnetic quantum number (mᐉ) has integral values between ᐉ and ᐉ,
including zero. The value of mᐉ is related to the orientation of the orbital in space
relative to the other orbitals in the atom.

n  1, 2, 3, . .
/  0, 1, . . . (n  1)
m/  /, . . . 0, . . . /

Sample Exercise 7.6

The ﬁrst four levels of orbitals in the hydrogen atom are listed with their quantum
numbers in Table 7.2. Note that each set of orbitals with a given value of ᐉ (sometimes called a subshell) is designated by giving the value of n and the letter for ᐉ. Thus
an orbital where n  2 and ᐉ  1 is symbolized as 2p. There are three 2p orbitals,
which have different orientations in space. We will describe these orbitals in the next
section.

Electron Subshells
For principal quantum level n  5, determine the number of allowed subshells (different
values of ᐉ), and give the designation of each.
Solution
For n  5, the allowed values of ᐉ run from 0 to 4 (n  1  5  1). Thus the subshells
and their designations are
/0
5s

/1
5p

/2
5d

/3
5f

/4
5g

See Exercises 7.57 through 7.59.

7.7 Orbital Shapes and Energies

7.7

Visualization: Orbital Energies

Visualization: 2px, 2py, 2pz
Orbitals

n value

g

2px m orientation in space

h
/ value

Visualization:
3dx2  y2, 3dxy, 3dxz, 3dyz, 3dz 2
Orbitals
Nodes
Node

1s
2s
(a)

3s

1s
2s
(b)

3s

FIGURE 7.13
Two representations of the hydrogen 1s, 2s,
and 3s orbitals. (a) The electron probability
distribution. (b) The surface that contains
90% of the total electron probability (the
size of the orbital, by deﬁnition).

295

Orbital Shapes and Energies

We have seen that the meaning of an orbital is represented most clearly by a probability
distribution. Each orbital in the hydrogen atom has a unique probability distribution. We
also saw that another means of representing an orbital is by the surface that surrounds
90% of the total electron probability. These two types of representations for the hydrogen
1s, 2s, and 3s orbitals are shown in Fig. 7.13. Note the characteristic spherical shape of
each of the s orbitals. Note also that the 2s and 3s orbitals contain areas of high probability separated by areas of zero probability. These latter areas are called nodal surfaces,
or simply nodes. The number of nodes increases as n increases. For s orbitals, the number of nodes is given by n  1. For our purposes, however, we will think of s orbitals
only in terms of their overall spherical shape, which becomes larger as the value of n
increases.
The two types of representations for the 2p orbitals (there are no 1p orbitals) are
shown in Fig. 7.14. Note that the p orbitals are not spherical like s orbitals but have two
lobes separated by a node at the nucleus. The p orbitals are labeled according to the axis
of the xyz coordinate system along which the lobes lie. For example, the 2p orbital with
lobes centered along the x axis is called the 2px orbital.
At this point it is useful to remember that mathematical functions have signs. For example, a simple sine wave (see Fig. 7.1) oscillates from positive to negative and repeats
this pattern. Atomic orbital functions also have signs. The functions for s orbitals are
positive everywhere in three-dimensional space. That is, when the s orbital function is
evaluated at any point in space, it results in a positive number. In contrast, the p orbital
functions have different signs in different regions of space. For example, the pz orbirtal
has a positive sign in all the regions of space in which z is positive and has a negative
sign when z is negative. This behavior is indicated in Fig. 7.14(b) by the positive and negative signs inside their boundary surfaces. It is important to understand that these are mathematical signs, not charges. Just as a sine wave has alternating positive and negative phases,
so too p orbitals have positive and negative phases. The phases of the px, py, and pz orbitals
are indicated in Fig. 7.14(b).
As you might expect from our discussion of the s orbitals, the 3p orbitals have a more
complex probability distribution than that of the 2p orbitals (see Fig. 7.15), but they can
still be represented by the same boundary surface shapes. The surfaces just grow larger
as the value of n increases.
There are no d orbitals that correspond to principal quantum levels n  1 and n
 2. The d orbitals (ᐉ  2) ﬁrst occur in level n  3. The ﬁve 3d orbitals have the
shapes shown in Fig. 7.16. The d orbitals have two different fundamental shapes. Four
of the orbitals (dxz, dyz, dxy, and dx2y2) have four lobes centered in the plane indicated in
the orbital label. Note that dxy and dx2y2 are both centered in the xy plane; however, the
lobes of dx2y2 lie along the x and y axes, while the lobes of dxy lie between the axes.
The ﬁfth orbital, dz2, has a unique shape with two lobes along the z axis and a belt centered in the xy plane. The d orbitals for levels n  3 look like the 3d orbitals but have
larger lobes.
The f orbitals ﬁrst occur in level n  4, and as might be expected, they have shapes
even more complex than those of the d orbitals. Figure 7.17 shows representations of the
4f orbitals (ᐉ  3) along with their designations. These orbitals are not involved in the
bonding in any of the compounds we will consider in this text. Their shapes and labels
are simply included for completeness.
So far we have talked about the shapes of the hydrogen atomic orbitals but not about
their energies. For the hydrogen atom, the energy of a particular orbital is determined by
its value of n. Thus all orbitals with the same value of n have the same energy—they are
said to be degenerate. This is shown in Fig. 7.18, where the energies for the orbitals in
the ﬁrst three quantum levels for hydrogen are shown.

296

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

z

z

–

+

+

y

y

–

x

x
2px

(a)

–

y

+

z

x
2py

2pz

(b)

FIGURE 7.14
Representation of the 2p orbitals. (a) The electron probability distribution for a 2p orbital. (Generated from a program by Robert Allendoerfer on Project
SERAPHIM disk PC 2402; reprinted with permission.) (b) The boundary surface representations of all three 2p orbitals. Note that the signs inside the
surface indicate the phases (signs) of the orbital in that region of space.

Hydrogen’s single electron can occupy any of its atomic orbitals. However, in the
lowest energy state, the ground state, the electron resides in the 1s orbital. If energy is
put into the atom, the electron can be transferred to a higher-energy orbital, producing an
excited state.

A Summary of the Hydrogen Atom
䊉

In the quantum (wave) mechanical model, the electron is viewed as a standing wave.
This representation leads to a series of wave functions (orbitals) that describe the possible energies and spatial distributions available to the electron.

䊉

In agreement with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, the model cannot specify the
detailed electron motions. Instead, the square of the wave function represents the
probability distribution of the electron in that orbital. This allows us to picture orbitals in terms of probability distributions, or electron density maps.

䊉

The size of an orbital is arbitrarily deﬁned as the surface that contains 90% of the
total electron probability.

䊉

The hydrogen atom has many types of orbitals. In the ground state, the single electron resides in the 1s orbital. The electron can be excited to higher-energy orbitals if
energy is put into the atom.

7.8

FIGURE 7.15
A cross section of the electron probability
distribution for a 3p orbital.

Electron Spin and the Pauli Principle

The concept of electron spin was developed by Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck
while they were graduate students at the University of Leyden in the Netherlands. They
found that a fourth quantum number (in addition to n, ᐉ, and mᐉ) was necessary to account
for the details of the emission spectra of atoms. The spectral data indicate that the electron has a magnetic moment with two possible orientations when the atom is placed
in an external magnetic ﬁeld. Since they knew from classical physics that a spinning charge
produces a magnetic moment, it seemed reasonable to assume that the electron could
have two spin states, thus producing the two oppositely directed magnetic moments

297

7.8 Electron Spin and the Pauli Principle

(a)
z

z
y

–

+

+

–
dxz

y

+

–

+

–

–

+

+
–

–

+

+

y

y

–
+

x

z

z

z

–

x

x
dyz

+

x

dxy

y

dx 2 – y 2

x

dz 2

(b)

FIGURE 7.16
Representation of the 3d orbitals. (a) Electron density plots of selected 3d orbitals. (Generated from a program by Robert Allendoerfer on Project SERAPHIM
disk PC 2402; reprinted with permission.) (b) The boundary surfaces of all ﬁve 3d orbitals, with the signs (phases) indicated.

z

z

z

x

x

y

y
fz3 –

z

x

y
fy(x 2 – z2)

3 yr2
—
5

z

x

y
fxyz

fy3 –

3 xr2
—
5

z

x

y

y
fx3 –

3 zr2
—
5

z

FIGURE 7.17
Representation of the 4f orbitals in terms
of their boundary surfaces.

x

x

y
fx(z 2 – y 2)

fz(x 2 – y 2)

298

E

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

3s

3p

2s

2p

3d

1s

FIGURE 7.18
Orbital energy levels for the hydrogen
atom.

ms  21 or 12
Each orbital can hold a maximum of two
electrons.

N

S

(see Fig. 7.19). The new quantum number adopted to describe this phenomenon, called
the electron spin quantum number (ms), can have only one of two values, 12 and 12.
We can interpret this to mean that the electron can spin in one of two opposite directions,
although other interpretations also have been suggested.
For our purposes, the main signiﬁcance of electron spin is connected with the postulate of Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli (1900–1958): In a given atom no two electrons
can have the same set of four quantum numbers (n, ᐉ, mᐉ, and ms). This is called the Pauli
exclusion principle. Since electrons in the same orbital have the same values of n, ᐉ, and
mᐉ, this postulate says that they must have different values of ms. Then, since only two
values of ms are allowed, an orbital can hold only two electrons, and they must have
opposite spins. This principle will have important consequences as we use the atomic
model to account for the electron arrangements of the atoms in the periodic table.

7.9

Polyelectronic Atoms

The quantum mechanical model gives a description of the hydrogen atom that agrees very
well with experimental data. However, the model would not be very useful if it did not
account for the properties of all the other atoms as well.
To see how the model applies to polyelectronic atoms, that is, atoms with more than
one electron, let’s consider helium, which has two protons in its nucleus and two electrons:
2

e–

e–

S
(a)

N
(b)

FIGURE 7.19
A picture of the spinning electron. Spinning
in one direction, the electron produces the
magnetic ﬁeld oriented as shown in (a).
Spinning in the opposite direction, it
gives a magnetic ﬁeld of the opposite
orientation, as shown in (b).

e
e

Three energy contributions must be considered in the description of the helium atom:
(1) the kinetic energy of the electrons as they move around the nucleus, (2) the potential
energy of attraction between the nucleus and the electrons, and (3) the potential energy
of repulsion between the two electrons.
Although the helium atom can be readily described in terms of the quantum mechanical
model, the Schrödinger equation that results cannot be solved exactly. The difﬁculty arises
in dealing with the repulsions between the electrons. Since the electron pathways are
unknown, the electron repulsions cannot be calculated exactly. This is called the electron
correlation problem.
The electron correlation problem occurs with all polyelectronic atoms. To treat these
systems using the quantum mechanical model, we must make approximations. Most commonly, the approximation used is to treat each electron as if it were moving in a ﬁeld of
charge that is the net result of the nuclear attraction and the average repulsions of all the
other electrons.
For example, consider the sodium atom, which has 11 electrons:

l l+
l le–

Now let’s single out the outermost electron and consider the forces this electron feels. The
electron clearly is attracted to the highly charged nucleus. However, the electron also feels
the repulsions caused by the other 10 electrons. The net effect is that the electron is not

Radial probability

7.10 The History of the Periodic Table

2p

2s

Distance from nucleus

Radial probability

FIGURE 7.20
A comparison of the radial probability
distributions of the 2s and 2p orbitals.

Most probable distance
from the nucleus
Penetration

Distance from the nucleus

Radial probability

(a)

Penetration

bound nearly as tightly to the nucleus as it would be if the other electrons were not
present. We say that the electron is screened or shielded from the nuclear charge by the
repulsions of the other electrons.
This picture of polyelectronic atoms leads to hydrogenlike orbitals for these atoms.
They have the same general shapes as the orbitals for hydrogen, but their sizes and energies are different. The differences occur because of the interplay between nuclear attraction and the electron repulsions.
One especially important difference between polyelectronic atoms and the hydrogen
atom is that for hydrogen all the orbitals in a given principal quantum level have the same
energy (they are said to be degenerate). This is not the case for polyelectronic atoms,
where we ﬁnd that for a given principal quantum level the orbitals vary in energy as
follows:
Ens 6 Enp 6 End 6 Enf
In other words, when electrons are placed in a particular quantum level, they “prefer” the orbitals in the order s, p, d, and then f. Why does this happen? Although the concept of orbital energies is a complicated matter, we can qualitatively understand why the
2s orbital has a lower energy than the 2p orbital in a polyelectronic atom by looking at
the probability proﬁles of these orbitals (see Fig. 7.20). Notice that the 2p orbital has its
maximum probability closer to the nucleus than for the 2s. This might lead us to predict
that the 2p would be preferable (lower energy) to the 2s orbital. However, notice the small
hump of electron density that occurs in the 2s proﬁle very near the nucleus. This means
that although an electron in the 2s orbital spends most of its time a little farther from the
nucleus than does an electron in the 2p orbital, it spends a small but very signiﬁcant amount
of time very near the nucleus. We say that the 2s electron penetrates to the nucleus more
than one in the 2p orbital. This penetration effect causes an electron in a 2s orbital to be
attracted to the nucleus more strongly than an electron in a 2p orbital. That is, the 2s orbital is lower in energy than the 2p orbitals in a polyelectronic atom.
The same thing happens in the other principal quantum levels as well. Figure 7.21
shows the radial probability proﬁles for the 3s, 3p, and 3d orbitals. Note again the hump
in the 3s proﬁle very near the nucleus. The innermost hump for the 3p is farther out, which
causes the energy of the 3s orbital to be lower than that of the 3p. Notice that the 3d orbital has its maximum probability closer to the nucleus than either the 3s or 3p does, but
its absence of probability near the nucleus causes it to be highest in energy of the three
orbitals. The relative energies of the orbitals for n  3 are
E3s 6 E3p 6 E3d

3s
3p
3d

Distance from the nucleus
(b)

FIGURE 7.21
(a) The radial probability distribution for
an electron in a 3s orbital. Although a
3s electron is mostly found far from the
nucleus, there is a small but signiﬁcant
probability (shown by the arrows) of its
being found close to the nucleus. The
3s electron penetrates the shield of inner
electrons. (b) The radial probability
distribution for the 3s, 3p, and 3d orbitals.
The arrows indicate that the s orbital (red
arrow) allows greater electron penetration
than the p orbital (yellow arrow) does; the
d orbital allows minimal electron penetration.

299

In general, the more effectively an orbital allows its electron to penetrate the shielding
electrons to be close to the nuclear charge, the lower is the energy of that orbital.
A summary diagram of the orders of the orbital energies for polyelectronic atoms is
represented in Fig. 7.22. We will use these orbitals in Section 7.11 to show how the electrons are arranged in polyelectronic atoms.

7.10

The History of the Periodic Table

The modern periodic table contains a tremendous amount of useful information. In this
section we will discuss the origin of this valuable tool; later we will see how the quantum mechanical model for the atom explains the periodicity of chemical properties. Certainly the greatest triumph of the quantum mechanical model is its ability to account for
the arrangement of the elements in the periodic table.
The periodic table was originally constructed to represent the patterns observed in
the chemical properties of the elements. As chemistry progressed during the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries, it became evident that the earth is composed of a great many

300

3s
E

2s

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

3p

3d

2p

1s

FIGURE 7.22
The orders of the energies of the orbitals
in the ﬁrst three levels of polyelectronic
atoms.

elements with very different properties. Things are much more complicated than the simple model of earth, air, ﬁre, and water suggested by the ancients. At ﬁrst, the array of
elements and properties was bewildering. Gradually, however, patterns were noticed.
The ﬁrst chemist to recognize patterns was Johann Dobereiner (1780–1849), who
found several groups of three elements that have similar properties, for example, chlorine,
bromine, and iodine. However, as Dobereiner attempted to expand this model of triads
(as he called them) to the rest of the known elements, it became clear that it was severely
limited.
The next notable attempt was made by the English chemist John Newlands, who in
1864 suggested that elements should be arranged in octaves, based on the idea that certain properties seemed to repeat for every eighth element in a way similar to the musical
scale, which repeats for every eighth tone. Even though this model managed to group several elements with similar properties, it was not generally successful.
The present form of the periodic table was conceived independently by two chemists:
the German Julius Lothar Meyer (1830–1895) and Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev
(1834–1907), a Russian (Fig. 7.23). Usually Mendeleev is given most of the credit, because it was he who emphasized how useful the table could be in predicting the existence
and properties of still unknown elements. For example, in 1872 when Mendeleev ﬁrst published his table (see Fig. 7.24), the elements gallium, scandium, and germanium were unknown. Mendeleev correctly predicted the existence and properties of these elements from
gaps in his periodic table. The data for germanium (which Mendeleev called “ekasilicon”)
are shown in Table 7.3. Note the excellent agreement between the actual values and
Mendeleev’s predictions, which were based on the properties of other members in the
group of elements similar to germanium.
Using his table, Mendeleev also was able to correct several values for atomic masses.
For example, the original atomic mass of 76 for indium was based on the assumption that
indium oxide had the formula InO. This atomic mass placed indium, which has metallic
properties, among the nonmetals. Mendeleev assumed the atomic mass was probably incorrect and proposed that the formula of indium oxide was really In2O3. Based on this
correct formula, indium has an atomic mass of approximately 113, placing the element
among the metals. Mendeleev also corrected the atomic masses of beryllium and uranium.
Because of its obvious usefulness, Mendeleev’s periodic table was almost universally
adopted, and it remains one of the most valuable tools at the chemist’s disposal. For example, it is still used to predict the properties of elements recently discovered, as shown
in Table 7.4.
A current version of the periodic table is shown inside the front cover of this book.
The only fundamental difference between this table and that of Mendeleev is that it lists
the elements in order by atomic number rather than by atomic mass. The reason for this
will become clear later in this chapter as we explore the electron arrangements of the
atom. Another recent format of the table is discussed in the following section.

FIGURE 7.23
Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev (1834–1907), born in Siberia as the youngest of 17 children, taught chemistry at the University of St. Petersburg. In 1860 Mendeleev heard the Italian chemist Cannizzaro lecture
on a reliable method for determining the correct atomic masses of the elements. This important development paved the way for Mendeleev’s own brilliant contribution to chemistry—the periodic table. In 1861
Mendeleev returned to St. Petersburg, where he wrote a book on organic chemistry. Later Mendeleev also
wrote a book on inorganic chemistry, and he was struck by the fact that the systematic approach characterizing organic chemistry was lacking in inorganic chemistry. In attempting to systematize inorganic
chemistry, he eventually arranged the elements in the form of the periodic table.
Mendeleev was a versatile genius who was interested in many ﬁelds of science. He worked on many
problems associated with Russia’s natural resources, such as coal, salt, and various metals. Being particularly interested in the petroleum industry, he visited the United States in 1876 to study the Pennsylvania
oil ﬁelds. His interests also included meteorology and hot-air balloons. In 1887 he made an ascent in a
balloon to study a total eclipse of the sun.

7.10 The History of the Periodic Table

FIGURE 7.24
Mendeleev’s early periodic table, published in 1872. Note the spaces left for missing elements with atomic masses
44, 68, 72, and 100.
(From Annalen der Chemie und Pharmacie, VIII, Supplementary Volume for 1872, page 511.)

TABLE 7.3 Comparison of the Properties of Germanium
as Predicted by Mendeleev and as Actually Observed
Properties of
Germanium
Atomic weight
Density
Speciﬁc heat
Melting point
Oxide formula
Oxide density
Chloride formula
bp of chloride

TABLE 7.4

Predicted
in 1871

Observed in
1886

72
5.5 g/cm3
0.31 J/(C  g)
Very high
RO2
4.7 g/cm3
RCl4
100C

72.3
5.47 g/cm3
0.32 J/(C  g)
960C
GeO2
4.70 g/cm3
GeCl4
86C

Predicted Properties of Elements 113 and 114

Property
Chemically like
Atomic mass
Density
Melting point
Boiling point

Element 113

Element 114

Thallium
297
16 g/mL
430C
1100C

Lead
298
14 g/mL
70C
150C

301

302

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Growing Periodic Table
he periodic table of the elements has undergone significant changes since Mendeleev published his ﬁrst version in 1869. In particular, in the past 60 years we have
added 20 new elements beyond uranium. These so-called
transuranium elements all have been synthesized using particle accelerators.
Edwin M. McMillan and Phillip H. Abelson succeeded
in synthesizing the ﬁrst transuranium element, neptunium
(element 93), at the University of California, Berkeley, in
1940. In 1941, Glenn T. Seaborg synthesized and identiﬁed
element 94 (plutonium), and over the next several years,
researchers under his direction at UC Berkeley discovered
nine other transuranium elements. In 1945 Seaborg suggested that the elements heavier than element 89 (actinium)
were misplaced as transition metals and should be relocated
on the periodic table in a series below the transition metals

T

7.11

Aufbau is German for “building up.”
H (Z  1)
He (Z  2)
Li (Z  3)
Be (Z  4)
B (Z  5)
etc.
(Z  atomic number)

Dr. Glenn Seaborg.

(the actinide series). Seaborg was awarded a Nobel Prize in
chemistry in 1951 for his contributions.

The Aufbau Principle and the Periodic Table

We can use the quantum mechanical model of the atom to show how the electron arrangements in the hydrogenlike atomic orbitals of the various atoms account for the organization of the periodic table. Our main assumption here is that all atoms have the same type
of orbitals as have been described for the hydrogen atom. As protons are added one by
one to the nucleus to build up the elements, electrons are similarly added to these hydrogenlike orbitals. This is called the aufbau principle.
Hydrogen has one electron, which occupies the 1s orbital in its ground state. The conﬁguration for hydrogen is written as 1s1, which can be represented by the following orbital
diagram:
1s
H: 1s

2s

2p

1

The arrow represents an electron spinning in a particular direction.
The next element, helium, has two electrons. Since two electrons with opposite spins
can occupy an orbital, according to the Pauli exclusion principle, the electrons for helium
are in the 1s orbital with opposite spins, producing a 1s2 conﬁguration:
1s
He: 1s

2s

2p

2

Lithium has three electrons, two of which can go into the 1s orbital before the orbital
is ﬁlled. Since the 1s orbital is the only orbital for n  1, the third electron will occupy
the lowest-energy orbital with n  2, or the 2s orbital, giving a 1s22s1 conﬁguration:
1s
Li: 1s22s1

2s

2p

7.11 The Aufbau Principle and the Periodic Table

In recent years, three major research facilities have
taken the lead in synthesizing new elements. Along with UC
Berkeley, Nuclear Research in Dubna, Russia, and GSI in
Darmstadt, Germany, were responsible for synthesizing elements 104–112 by the end of 1996.
As it turned out, naming the new elements has caused
more controversy than anything else connected with their
discovery. Traditionally, the discoverer of an element is
allowed to name it. However, because there is some dispute among the researchers at Berkeley, Darmstadt, and
Dubna about who really discovered the various elements,
competing names were submitted. After years of controversy, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) ﬁnally settled on the names listed in the
accompanying table.
The name for element 106 in honor of Glenn Seaborg
caused special controversy because an element had never
before been named for a living person (Dr. Seaborg died in
1999). However, because of Seaborg’s commanding stature

303

in the scientiﬁc community, the name seaborgium was
adopted.
Names for the elements beyond 111 have not been decided, and these elements are represented on many periodic
tables with three letters that symbolize their atomic numbers. More traditional names will no doubt be assigned in
due time (hopefully with a minimum of controversy).

Atomic
Number

Name

104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111

Symbol

Rutherfordium
Dubium
Seaborgium
Bohrium
Hassium
Meitnerium
Darmstadtium
Roentgenium

Rf
Db
Sg
Bh
Hs
Mt
Ds
Rg

The next element, beryllium, has four electrons, which occupy the 1s and 2s orbitals:
1s
2

2s

2p

2

Be: 1s 2s

Boron has ﬁve electrons, four of which occupy the 1s and 2s orbitals. The ﬁfth electron goes into the second type of orbital with n  2, the 2p orbitals:
1s
2

2

B: 1s 2s 2p

For an atom with unﬁlled subshells, the
lowest energy is achieved by electrons
occupying separate orbitals with parallel
spins, as far as allowed by the Pauli
exclusion principle.

2s

2p

1

Since all the 2p orbitals have the same energy (are degenerate), it does not matter which
2p orbital the electron occupies.
Carbon is the next element and has six electrons. Two electrons occupy the 1s orbital,
two occupy the 2s orbital, and two occupy 2p orbitals. Since there are three 2p orbitals
with the same energy, the mutually repulsive electrons will occupy separate 2p orbitals.
This behavior is summarized by Hund’s rule (named for the German physicist F. H.
Hund), which states that the lowest energy conﬁguration for an atom is the one having
the maximum number of unpaired electrons allowed by the Pauli principle in a particular set of degenerate orbitals. By convention, the unpaired electrons are represented as
having parallel spins (with spin “up”).
The conﬁguration for carbon could be written 1s22s22p12p1 to indicate that the electrons
occupy separate 2p orbitals. However, the conﬁguration is usually given as 1s22s22p2, and it
is understood that the electrons are in different 2p orbitals. The orbital diagram for carbon is
1s
2

2

2s

2p

2

C: 1s 2s 2p

Note that the unpaired electrons in the 2p orbitals are shown with parallel spins.

304

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
The conﬁguration for nitrogen, which has seven electrons, is 1s22s22p3. The three
electrons in the 2p orbitals occupy separate orbitals with parallel spins:
1s
2

2

2s

2p

3

N: 1s 2s 2p

The conﬁguration for oxygen, which has eight electrons, is 1s22s22p4. One of the 2p
orbitals is now occupied by a pair of electrons with opposite spins, as required by the
Pauli exclusion principle:
1s
2

2

2s

2p

4

O: 1s 2s 2p
[Ne] is shorthand for 1s 2 2s 2 2p 6.

The orbital diagrams and electron conﬁgurations for ﬂuorine (nine electrons) and neon
(ten electrons) are as follows:
1s
F:

2

2

2s

2p

5

1s 2s 2p

Ne: 1s22s22p6

Sodium metal is so reactive that it is stored
under kerosene to protect it from the
oxygen in the air.

A vial containing potassium metal. The
sealed vial contains an inert gas to protect
the potassium from reacting with oxygen.

FIGURE 7.25
The electron conﬁgurations in the type
of orbital occupied last for the ﬁrst
18 elements.

With neon, the orbitals with n  1 and n  2 are now completely ﬁlled.
For sodium, the ﬁrst ten electrons occupy the 1s, 2s, and 2p orbitals, and the eleventh
electron must occupy the ﬁrst orbital with n  3, the 3s orbital. The electron conﬁguration for sodium is 1s22s22p63s1. To avoid writing the inner-level electrons, this conﬁguration is often abbreviated as [Ne]3s1, where [Ne] represents the electron conﬁguration of
neon, 1s22s22p6.
The next element, magnesium, has the conﬁguration 1s22s22p63s2, or [Ne]3s2. Then
the next six elements, aluminum through argon, have conﬁgurations obtained by ﬁlling
the 3p orbitals one electron at a time. Figure 7.25 summarizes the electron conﬁgurations
of the ﬁrst 18 elements by giving the number of electrons in the type of orbital occupied
last.
At this point it is useful to introduce the concept of valence electrons, the electrons
in the outermost principal quantum level of an atom. The valence electrons of the nitrogen atom, for example, are the 2s and 2p electrons. For the sodium atom, the valence electron is the electron in the 3s orbital, and so on. Valence electrons are the most important
electrons to chemists because they are involved in bonding, as we will see in the next two
chapters. The inner electrons are known as core electrons.
Note in Fig. 7.25 that a very important pattern is developing: The elements in the
same group (vertical column of the periodic table) have the same valence electron
conﬁguration. Remember that Mendeleev originally placed the elements in groups based
on similarities in chemical properties. Now we understand the reason behind these

H
1s1

He
1s 2

Li
2s1

Be
2s2

B
2p1

C
2p 2

N
2p 3

O
2p 4

F
2p 5

Ne
2p 6

Na
3s1

Mg
3s 2

Al
3p1

Si
3p 2

P
3p 3

S
3p 4

Cl
3p 5

Ar
3p 6

7.11 The Aufbau Principle and the Periodic Table

305

groupings. Elements with the same valence electron conﬁguration show similar chemical
behavior.
The element after argon is potassium. Since the 3p orbitals are fully occupied in argon, we might expect the next electron to go into a 3d orbital (recall that for n  3 the
orbitals are 3s, 3p, and 3d). However, the chemistry of potassium is clearly very similar
to that of lithium and sodium, indicating that the last electron in potassium occupies the
4s orbital instead of one of the 3d orbitals, a conclusion conﬁrmed by many types of
experiments. The electron conﬁguration of potassium is
K:

1s22s22p63s23p64s1

or

3Ar44s1

The next element is calcium:
3Ar44s2

Ca:

The next element, scandium, begins a series of 10 elements (scandium through zinc)
called the transition metals, whose conﬁgurations are obtained by adding electrons to
the ﬁve 3d orbitals. The conﬁguration of scandium is
Sc:

3Ar44s23d1

Ti:

3Ar44s23d2

V:

3Ar44s23d3

That of titanium is

And that of vanadium is

Calcium metal.

Chromium is the next element. The expected conﬁguration is [Ar]4s23d 4. However,
the observed conﬁguration is
Cr:

3Ar44s13d5

The explanation for this conﬁguration of chromium is beyond the scope of this book. In
fact, chemists are still disagreeing over the exact cause of this anomaly. Note, however,
that the observed conﬁguration has both the 4s and 3d orbitals half-ﬁlled. This is a good
way to remember the correct conﬁguration.
The next four elements, manganese through nickel, have the expected conﬁgurations:
Mn:
Fe:

3Ar44s23d 5
3Ar44s23d 6

Co:
Ni :

3Ar44s23d7
3Ar44s23d 8

The conﬁguration for copper is expected to be [Ar]4s23d 9. However, the observed
conﬁguration is
Cu:

3Ar44s13d10

In this case, a half-ﬁlled 4s orbital and a ﬁlled set of 3d orbitals characterize the actual
conﬁguration.
Zinc has the expected conﬁguration:
Zn:

Chromium is often used to plate bumpers
and hood ornaments, such as this statue of
Mercury found on a 1929 Buick.

The (n  1)s orbital ﬁlls before the nd
orbitals.

3Ar44s23d10

The conﬁgurations of the transition metals are shown in Fig. 7.26. After that, the next
six elements, gallium through krypton, have conﬁgurations that correspond to ﬁlling the
4p orbitals (see Fig. 7.26).
The entire periodic table is represented in Fig. 7.27 in terms of which orbitals are being ﬁlled. The valence electron conﬁgurations are given in Fig. 7.28. From these two ﬁgures, note the following additional points:
1. The (n  1)s orbitals always ﬁll before the nd orbitals. For example, the 5s orbitals
ﬁll in rubidium and strontium before the 4d orbitals ﬁll in the second row of transition

306

K
4s1

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

Ca
4s 2

Sc
3d1

Ti
3d 2

V
3d 3

Cr
4s1 3d5

Mn
3d 5

Fe
3d 6

Co
3d 7

Ni
3d 8

Cu
Zn
4s13d10 3d10

Ga
4p1

Ge
4p 2

As
4p 3

Se
4p 4

Br
4p 5

Kr
4p 6

FIGURE 7.26
Electron conﬁgurations for potassium through krypton. The transition metals (scandium through zinc) have the general conﬁguration
[Ar]4s23dn, except for chromium and copper.

metals (yttrium through cadmium). This early ﬁlling of the s orbitals can be explained
by the penetration effect. For example, the 4s orbital allows for so much more penetration to the vicinity of the nucleus that it becomes lower in energy than the 3d orbital. Thus the 4s ﬁlls before the 3d. The same things can be said about the 5s and
4d, the 6s and 5d, and the 7s and 6d orbitals.
Lanthanides are elements in which the 4f
orbitals are being ﬁlled.

Actinides are elements in which the 5f
orbitals are being ﬁlled.

2. After lanthanum, which has the conﬁguration [Xe]6s25d1, a group of 14 elements
called the lanthanide series, or the lanthanides, occurs. This series of elements corresponds to the ﬁlling of the seven 4f orbitals. Note that sometimes an electron
occupies a 5d orbital instead of a 4f orbital. This occurs because the energies of the
4f and 5d orbitals are very similar.
3. After actinium, which has the conﬁguration [Rn]7s26d1, a group of 14 elements called
the actinide series, or the actinides, occurs. This series corresponds to the ﬁlling of
the seven 5f orbitals. Note that sometimes one or two electrons occupy the 6d orbitals
instead of the 5f orbitals, because these orbitals have very similar energies.

1A
1

FIGURE 7.27
The orbitals being ﬁlled for elements in
various parts of the periodic table. Note
that in going along a horizontal row (a
period), the (n  1)s orbital ﬁlls before the
nd orbital. The group labels indicate the
number of valence electrons (ns plus np
electrons) for the elements in each group.

1s

Group

8A

2A

3A 4A 5A 6A 7A

2

2s

2p

3

3s

3p

Period 4

4s

3d

4p

5

5s

4d

5p

6

6s

La

5d

6p

7

7s

Ac

6d

4f
5f

1s

7.11 The Aufbau Principle and the Periodic Table

307

4. The group labels for Groups 1A, 2A, 3A, 4A, 5A, 6A, 7A, and 8A indicate the total
number of valence electrons for the atoms in these groups. For example, all the
elements in Group 5A have the conﬁguration ns2np3. (The d electrons ﬁll one period
late and are usually not counted as valence electrons.) The meaning of the group labels
for the transition metals is not as clear as for the Group A elements, and these will
not be used in this text.

The group label tells the total number of
valence electrons for that group.

5. The groups labeled 1A, 2A, 3A, 4A, 5A, 6A, 7A, and 8A are often called the maingroup, or representative, elements. Every member of these groups has the same valence electron conﬁguration.
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), a body of scientists
organized to standardize scientiﬁc conventions, has recommended a new form for the periodic table, which the American Chemical Society has adopted (see the blue numbers in
Fig. 7.28). In this new version the group number indicates the number of s, p, and d electrons added since the last noble gas. We will not use the new format in this book, but you

Representative
Elements
1

1A
ns1

d-Transition Elements

Noble
Gases

Representative Elements

18

Group
numbers

8A
ns2np6

1

1

H

Period number, highest occupied electron level

1s1

2

3

4

5

6

7

2
2

13

14

15

16

17

2A

3A

4A

5A

6A

7A

ns2

ns2np1

ns2np2

ns2np3

ns2np4

ns2np5

He
1s2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

Ne

2s1

2s2

2s22p1

2s22p2

2s22p3

2s22p4

2s22p5

2s22p6

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

3s1

3s2

3s23p1

3s23p2

3s23p3

3s23p4

3s23p5

3s23p6

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

K

Ca

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

4s1

4s2

4s23d1

4s23d 2

4s23d 3

4s13d5

4s23d5

4s23d6

4s23d 7

4s23d8

4s13d10

4s23d10

4s24p1

4s24p2

4s24p3

4s24p4

4s24p5

4s24p6

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

Rb

Sr

Y

Zr

Nb

Mo

Tc

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

5s1

5s2

5s24d1

5s24d 2

5s14d4

5s14d5

5s14d6

5s14d 7

5s14d8

4d10

5s14d10

5s24d10

5s25p1

5s25p2

5s25p3

5s25p4

5s25p5

5s25p6

55

56

57

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

Cs

Ba

La*

Hf

Ta

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au

Hg

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

6s1

6s2

6s25d1

4f 146s25d 2

6s25d3

6s25d4

6s25d5

6s25d6

6s25d 7

6s15d 9

6s15d10

6s25d10

6s26p1

6s26p2

6s26p3

6s26p4

6s26p5

6s26p6

87

88

89

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

Fr

Ra

Ac**

Rf

Db

Sg

Bh

Hs

Mt

Ds

Rg

Uub

Uut

Uuq

Uup

7s1

7s2

7s26d1

7s26d 2

7s26d3

7s26d4

7s26d5

7s26d6

7s26d 7

7s26d8

7s16d10

7s26d10

7s26d107p1 7s26d107p2 7s26d107p3

f-Transition Elements

*Lanthanides

**Actinides

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

Ce

Pr

Nd

Pm

Sm

Eu

Gd

Tb

Dy

Ho

Er

Tm

Yb

Lu

6s24f 15d1

6s 2 4f 3 5d 0

6s24f 45d 0

6s24f 55d 0

6s24f 65d 0

6s24f 75d0

6s24f 75d1

6s24f 95d0

6s24f 105d0 6s24f 115d0 6s24f 125d0 6s24f 135d0 6s24f 145d0 6s24f 145d1

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

Th

Pa

U

Np

Pu

Am

Cm

Bk

Cf

Es

Fm

Md

No

Lr

7s25f 06d 2

7s25f 26d1

7s25f 36d1

7s25f 46d1

7s25f 66d0

7s25f 76d0

7s25f 76d1

7s25f 96d0

FIGURE 7.28
The periodic table with atomic symbols, atomic numbers, and partial electron conﬁgurations.

7s25f 106d0 7s25f 116d0 7s25f 126d0 7s25f 136d0 7s25f 146d0 7s25f 146d1

308

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

When an electron conﬁguration is given
in this text, the orbitals are listed in the
order in which they ﬁll.
Cr: [Ar]4s13d 5
Cu: [Ar]4s13d 10

Sample Exercise 7.7

should be aware that the familiar periodic table may be soon replaced by this or a similar
format.
The results considered in this section are very important. We have seen that the quantum mechanical model can be used to explain the arrangement of the elements in the
periodic table. This model allows us to understand that the similar chemistry exhibited by
the members of a given group arises from the fact that they all have the same valence
electron conﬁguration. Only the principal quantum number of the valence orbitals changes
in going down a particular group.
It is important to be able to give the electron conﬁguration for each of the main-group
elements. This is most easily done by using the periodic table. If you understand how the
table is organized, it is not necessary to memorize the order in which the orbitals ﬁll. Review Figs. 7.27 and 7.28 to make sure that you understand the correspondence between
the orbitals and the periods and groups.
Predicting the conﬁgurations of the transition metals (3d, 4d, and 5d elements), the
lanthanides (4f elements), and the actinides (5f elements) is somewhat more difﬁcult
because there are many exceptions of the type encountered in the ﬁrst-row transition metals (the 3d elements). You should memorize the conﬁgurations of chromium and copper,
the two exceptions in the ﬁrst-row transition metals, since these elements are often
encountered.

Electron Conﬁgurations
Give the electron conﬁgurations for sulfur (S), cadmium (Cd), hafnium (Hf), and radium
(Ra) using the periodic table inside the front cover of this book.
Solution
Sulfur is element 16 and resides in Period 3, where the 3p orbitals are being ﬁlled (see
Fig. 7.29). Since sulfur is the fourth among the “3p elements,” it must have four 3p electrons. Its conﬁguration is
S: 1s22s22p63s23p4 or

3Ne43s23p4

Cadmium is element 48 and is located in Period 5 at the end of the 4d transition metals, as shown in Fig. 7.29. It is the tenth element in the series and thus has 10 electrons
in the 4d orbitals, in addition to the 2 electrons in the 5s orbital. The conﬁguration is
Cd: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d10

or

3Kr45s24d10

Hafnium is element 72 and is found in Period 6, as shown in Fig. 7.29. Note that it
occurs just after the lanthanide series. Thus the 4f orbitals are already ﬁlled. Hafnium is
Group
1A

Period

8A
2A

1 1s

3A 4A 5A 6A 7A 1s

2

2s

3

3s

2p

4

4s

3d

5

5s

4d

6

6s

3p

La Hf

7 7s Ra Ac

FIGURE 7.29
The positions of the elements considered in
Sample Exercise 7.7.

S
4p

Cd

5p

5d

6p

6d
4f
5f

7.12 Periodic Trends in Atomic Properties

309

the second member of the 5d transition series and has two 5d electrons. The conﬁguration is
Hf:

1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f 145d2 or

3Xe46s24f 145d2

Radium is element 88 and is in Period 7 (and Group 2A), as shown in Fig. 7.29. Thus
radium has two electrons in the 7s orbital, and the conﬁguration is
Ra:

1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f 145d106p67s2

or

3Rn47s2

See Exercises 7.69 through 7.72.

7.12
Visualization: Periodic Table
Trends
Ionization energy results in the formation
of a positive ion.

Periodic Trends in Atomic Properties

We have developed a fairly complete picture of polyelectronic atoms. Although the model
is rather crude because the nuclear attractions and electron repulsions are simply lumped
together, it is very successful in accounting for the periodic table of elements. We will
next use the model to account for the observed trends in several important atomic properties: ionization energy, electron afﬁnity, and atomic size.

Ionization Energy
Ionization energy is the energy required to remove an electron from a gaseous atom or ion:
X1g2 ¡ X 1g2  e
where the atom or ion is assumed to be in its ground state.
To introduce some of the characteristics of ionization energy, we will consider the
energy required to remove several electrons in succession from aluminum in the gaseous
state. The ionization energies are
Al1g2
Al 1g2
Al2 1g2
Al3 1g2

Setting the aluminum cap on the
Washington Monument in 1884. At that
time, aluminum was regarded as a precious
metal.

¡
¡
¡
¡

Al  1g2  e
Al2 1g2  e
Al3 1g2  e
Al4 1g2  e

I1 
I2 
I3 
I4 

580 kJ/mol
1815 kJ/mol
2740 kJ/mol
11,600 kJ/mol

Several important points can be illustrated from these results. In a stepwise ionization
process, it is always the highest-energy electron (the one bound least tightly) that is
removed ﬁrst. The ﬁrst ionization energy I1 is the energy required to remove the highestenergy electron of an atom. The ﬁrst electron removed from the aluminum atom comes
from the 3p orbital (Al has the electron conﬁguration [Ne]3s23p1). The second electron
comes from the 3s orbital (since Al has the conﬁguration [Ne]3s2). Note that the value
of I1 is considerably smaller than the value of I2, the second ionization energy.
This makes sense for several reasons. The primary factor is simply charge. Note that
the ﬁrst electron is removed from a neutral atom (Al), whereas the second electron is removed from a 1 ion (Al). The increase in positive charge binds the electrons more
ﬁrmly, and the ionization energy increases. The same trend shows up in the third (I3) and
fourth (I4) ionization energies, where the electron is removed from the Al2 and Al3 ions,
respectively.
The increase in successive ionization energies for an atom also can be interpreted using our simple model for polyelectronic atoms. The increase in ionization energy from I1
to I2 makes sense because the ﬁrst electron is removed from a 3p orbital that is higher in
energy than the 3s orbital from which the second electron is removed. The largest jump in
ionization energy by far occurs in going from the third ionization energy (I3) to the fourth
(I4). This is so because I4 corresponds to removing a core electron (Al3 has the conﬁguration 1s22s22p6), and core electrons are bound much more tightly than valence electrons.

310

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

TABLE 7.5 Successive Ionization Energies in Kilojoules per Mole for the
Elements in Period 3
I1

I2

I3

Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Ar

495
735
580
780
1060
1005
1255
1527

4560
1445
1815
1575
1890
2260
2295
2665

7730
2740
3220
2905
3375
3850
3945

General decrease

Element

I4

I5

Core electrons*
11,600
4350
16,100
4950
6270
4565
6950
5160
6560
5770
7230

I6

I7

21,200
8490
9360
8780

27,000
11,000
12,000

*Note the large jump in ionization energy in going from removal of valence electrons to removal of core
electrons.

General increase

TABLE 7.6 First Ionization
Energies for the Alkali Metals
and Noble Gases
Atom

I1(kJ/mol)

Group 1A
Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs

520
495
419
409
382

Group 8A
He
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe

2377
2088
1527
1356
1176

Rn

1042

Table 7.5 gives the values of ionization energies for all the Period 3 elements. Note
the large jump in energy in each case in going from removal of valence electrons to removal
of core electrons.
The values of the ﬁrst ionization energies for the elements in the ﬁrst six periods of
the periodic table are graphed in Fig. 7.30. Note that in general as we go across a period
from left to right, the ﬁrst ionization energy increases. This is consistent with the idea that
electrons added in the same principal quantum level do not completely shield the increasing nuclear charge caused by the added protons. Thus electrons in the same principal quantum level are generally more strongly bound as we move to the right on the periodic table, and there is a general increase in ionization energy values as electrons are
added to a given principal quantum level.
On the other hand, ﬁrst ionization energy decreases in going down a group. This can
be seen most clearly by focusing on the Group 1A elements (the alkali metals) and the
Group 8A elements (the noble gases), as shown in Table 7.6. The main reason for the decrease in ionization energy in going down a group is that the electrons being removed are,
on average, farther from the nucleus. As n increases, the size of the orbital increases, and
the electron is easier to remove.

Period
2

First ionization energy increases across a
period and decreases down a group.

Period
3

Period
4

Period
5

Period
6

2500
He
Ne

FIGURE 7.30
The values of ﬁrst ionization energy for the
elements in the ﬁrst six periods. In general,
ionization energy decreases in going down
a group. For example, note the decrease in
values for Group 1A and Group 8A. In
general, ionization energy increases in
going left to right across a period. For
example, note the sharp increase going
across Period 2 from lithium through neon.

Ionization energy (kJ/mol)

2000
F
Ar

1500

N
H

1000

Be

Kr
Cl

O
C

P

B Mg
500

Li

Na

Xe

Br
As

S
Al

Rn
Cd

Zn

Tl
K

Rb

Cs

0
10

18

36
Atomic number

54

86

7.12 Periodic Trends in Atomic Properties
1A

2A

3A

4A

5A

6A

7A

8A
He

H
1
2
3

FIGURE 7.31
Trends in ionization energies (kJ/mol) for
the representative elements.

2377

1311

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

Ne

1402

1314

1681

2088

520

899

800

1086

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

1060

1005

1255

1527

495

735

580

780

Ca

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

4

K
419

590

579

761

947

941

1143

1356

5

Rb

Sr

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

558

708

834

869

1009

1176

6

311

409

549

Cs

Ba

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

382

503

589

715

703

813

(926)

1042

In Fig. 7.30 we see that there are some discontinuities in ionization energy in going
across a period. For example, for Period 2, discontinuities occur in going from beryllium
to boron and from nitrogen to oxygen. These exceptions to the normal trend can be explained in terms of electron repulsions. The decrease in ionization energy in going from
beryllium to boron reﬂects the fact that the electrons in the ﬁlled 2s orbital provide some
shielding for electrons in the 2p orbital from the nuclear charge. The decrease in ionization energy in going from nitrogen to oxygen reﬂects the extra electron repulsions in the
doubly occupied oxygen 2p orbital.
The ionization energies for the representative elements are summarized in Fig. 7.31.

Sample Exercise 7.8

Trends in Ionization Energies
The ﬁrst ionization energy for phosphorus is 1060 kJ/mol, and that for sulfur is 1005
kJ/mol. Why?
Solution
Phosphorus and sulfur are neighboring elements in Period 3 of the periodic table and have
the following valence electron conﬁgurations: Phosphorus is 3s23p3, and sulfur is 3s23p4.
Ordinarily, the ﬁrst ionization energy increases as we go across a period, so we might
expect sulfur to have a greater ionization energy than phosphorus. However, in this case
the fourth p electron in sulfur must be placed in an already occupied orbital. The
electron–electron repulsions that result cause this electron to be more easily removed than
might be expected.
See Exercises 7.93 and 7.94.

Sample Exercise 7.9

Ionization Energies
Consider atoms with the following electron conﬁgurations:
1s22s22p6
1s22s22p63s1
1s22s22p63s2
Which atom has the largest ﬁrst ionization energy, and which one has the smallest second
ionization energy? Explain your choices.

312

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
Solution
The atom with the largest value of I1 is the one with the conﬁguration 1s22s22p6 (this is
the neon atom), because this element is found at the right end of Period 2. Since the 2p
electrons do not shield each other very effectively, I1 will be relatively large. The other
conﬁgurations given include 3s electrons. These electrons are effectively shielded by the
core electrons and are farther from the nucleus than the 2p electrons in neon. Thus I1 for
these atoms will be smaller than for neon.
The atom with the smallest value of I2 is the one with the conﬁguration 1s22s22p63s2
(the magnesium atom). For magnesium, both I1 and I2 involve valence electrons. For the
atom with the conﬁguration 1s22s22p63s1 (sodium), the second electron lost (corresponding to I2) is a core electron (from a 2p orbital).
See Exercises 7.121 and 7.123.

Electron Afﬁnity
Electron afﬁnity is associated with the
production of a negative ion.

Electron afﬁnity is the energy change associated with the addition of an electron to a
gaseous atom:
X1g2  e ¡ X 1g2

FIGURE 7.32
The electron afﬁnity values for atoms
among the ﬁrst 20 elements that form
stable, isolated X ions. The lines shown
connect adjacent elements. The absence of
a line indicates missing elements (He, Be,
N, Ne, Mg, and Ar) whose atoms do not
add an electron exothermically and thus do
not form stable, isolated X ions.

Because two different conventions have been used, there is a good deal of confusion in
the chemical literature about the signs for electron afﬁnity values. Electron afﬁnity has
been deﬁned in many textbooks as the energy released when an electron is added to a
gaseous atom. This convention requires that a positive sign be attached to an exothermic
addition of an electron to an atom, which opposes normal thermodynamic conventions.
Therefore, in this book we deﬁne electron afﬁnity as a change in energy, which means
that if the addition of the electron is exothermic, the corresponding value for electron afﬁnity will carry a negative sign.
Figure 7.32 shows the electron afﬁnity values for the atoms among the ﬁrst 20 elements that form stable, isolated negative ions—that is, the atoms that undergo the addition
of an electron as shown above. As expected, all these elements have negative (exothermic)
electron afﬁnities. Note that the more negative the energy, the greater the quantity of energy released. Although electron afﬁnities generally become more negative from left to
right across a period, there are several exceptions to this rule in each period. The dependence of electron afﬁnity on atomic number can be explained by considering the changes
in electron repulsions as a function of electron conﬁgurations. For example, the fact that
the nitrogen atom does not form a stable, isolated N(g) ion, whereas carbon forms C(g),
reﬂects the difference in the electron conﬁgurations of these atoms. An electron added to
nitrogen (1s22s22p3) to form the N(g) ion (1s22s22p4) would have to occupy a 2p orbital
that already contains one electron. The extra repulsion between the electrons in this doubly occupied orbital causes N(g) to be unstable. When an electron is added to carbon
(1s22s22p2) to form the C(g) ion (1s22s22p3), no such extra repulsions occur.
In contrast to the nitrogen atom, the oxygen atom can add one electron to form the stable O(g) ion. Presumably oxygen’s greater nuclear charge compared with that of nitrogen
Electron affinity (kJ/mol)

The sign convention for electron afﬁnity
values follows the convention for energy
changes used in Chapter 6.

0
–100

B
H

Ca

Al P

Li

K

Na
C

–200

O

Si
S

–300
F
2

4

6

8

Cl
10

12

14

Atomic number

16

18

20

7.12 Periodic Trends in Atomic Properties

TABLE 7.7 Electron Afﬁnities
of the Halogens
Atom

Electron Afﬁnity
(kJ/mol)

F
Cl
Br
I

327.8
348.7
324.5
295.2

313

is sufﬁcient to overcome the repulsion associated with putting a second electron into an already occupied 2p orbital. However, it should be noted that a second electron cannot be
added to an oxygen atom [O(g)  e n
 O2(g)] to form an isolated oxide ion. This outcome seems strange in view of the many stable oxide compounds (MgO, Fe2O3, and so on)
that are known. As we will discuss in detail in Chapter 8, the O2 ion is stabilized in ionic
compounds by the large attractions that occur among the positive ions and the oxide ions.
When we go down a group, electron afﬁnity should become more positive (less energy
released), since the electron is added at increasing distances from the nucleus. Although this
is generally the case, the changes in electron afﬁnity in going down most groups are relatively small, and numerous exceptions occur. This behavior is demonstrated by the electron
afﬁnities of the Group 7A elements (the halogens) shown in Table 7.7. Note that the range
of values is quite small compared with the changes that typically occur across a period. Also
note that although chlorine, bromine, and iodine show the expected trend, the energy released when an electron is added to ﬂuorine is smaller than might be expected. This smaller
energy release has been attributed to the small size of the 2p orbitals. Because the electrons
must be very close together in these orbitals, there are unusually large electron–electron repulsions. In the other halogens with their larger orbitals, the repulsions are not as severe.

Atomic Radius
2r

Br

Br

FIGURE 7.33
The radius of an atom (r) is deﬁned as half
the distance between the nuclei in a molecule consisting of identical atoms.

Visualization: Determining the
Atomic Radius of a Nonmetal
(Chlorine)
Visualization: Determining the
Atomic Radius of a Nonmetal
(Carbon)

Sample Exercise 7.10

Just as the size of an orbital cannot be speciﬁed exactly, neither can the size of an atom.
We must make some arbitrary choices to obtain values for atomic radii. These values can
be obtained by measuring the distances between atoms in chemical compounds. For example, in the bromine molecule, the distance between the two nuclei is known to be 228
pm. The bromine atomic radius is assumed to be half this distance, or 114 pm, as shown
in Fig. 7.33. These radii are often called covalent atomic radii because of the way they
are determined (from the distances between atoms in covalent bonds).
For nonmetallic atoms that do not form diatomic molecules, the atomic radii are estimated from their various covalent compounds. The radii for metal atoms (called metallic radii) are obtained from half the distance between metal atoms in solid metal crystals.
The values of the atomic radii for the representative elements are shown in Fig. 7.34.
Note that these values are signiﬁcantly smaller than might be expected from the 90% electron
density volumes of isolated atoms, because when atoms form bonds, their electron “clouds”
interpenetrate. However, these values form a self-consistent data set that can be used to discuss
the trends in atomic radii.
Note from Fig. 7.34 that the atomic radii decrease in going from left to right across
a period. This decrease can be explained in terms of the increasing effective nuclear charge
(decreasing shielding) in going from left to right. This means that the valence electrons
are drawn closer to the nucleus, decreasing the size of the atom.
Atomic radius increases down a group, because of the increases in the orbital sizes
in successive principal quantum levels.

Trends in Radii
Predict the trend in radius for the following ions: Be2, Mg2, Ca2, and Sr2.
Solution
All these ions are formed by removing two electrons from an atom of a Group 2A element.
In going from beryllium to strontium, we are going down the group, so the sizes increase:
Be2 6 Mg2 6 Ca2 6 Sr2

h
Smallest radius

h
Largest radius

See Exercises 7.85, 7.86, and 7.89.

314

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
Atomic radius decreases

Atomic radius increases

1A

FIGURE 7.34
Atomic radii (in picometers) for selected
atoms. Note that atomic radius decreases
going across a period and increases going
down a group. The values for the noble
gases are estimated, because data from
bonded atoms are lacking.

2A

3A

4A

5A

6A

7A

8A

H

He

37

32

B

C

N

O

F

Ne

113

88

77

70

66

64

69

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

186

160

143

117

110

104

99

97

K

Ca

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

227

197

122

122

121

117

114

110

Rb

Sr

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

247

215

163

140

141

143

133

130

Cs

Ba

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

265

217

170

175

155

167

140

145

Li

Be

152

7.13

The Properties of a Group: The Alkali Metals

We have seen that the periodic table originated as a way to portray the systematic properties
of the elements. Mendeleev was primarily responsible for ﬁrst showing its usefulness in
correlating and predicting the elemental properties. In this section we will summarize
much of the information available from the table. We also will illustrate the usefulness of
the table by discussing the properties of a representative group, the alkali metals.

Information Contained in the Periodic Table
1. The essence of the periodic table is that the groups of representative elements exhibit
similar chemical properties that change in a regular way. The quantum mechanical
model of the atom has allowed us to understand the basis for the similarity of properties
in a group—that each group member has the same valence electron conﬁguration. It
is the number and type of valence electrons that primarily determine an atom’s
chemistry.
2. One of the most valuable types of information available from the periodic table is the
electron conﬁguration of any representative element. If you understand the organization

7.13 The Properties of a Group: The Alkali Metals
Alkali
metals

315

Noble
gases

1A
H 2A

Alkaline
earth
metals

Halogens

8A

3A 4A 5A 6A 7A

Transition elements

Lanthanides
Actinides

1A

8A
2A

3A 4A 5A 6A 7A
Nonmetals

Metals

Metalloids

FIGURE 7.35
Special names for groups in the
periodic table.

Lanthanides
Actinides

of the table, you will not need to memorize electron conﬁgurations for these elements.
Although the predicted electron conﬁgurations for transition metals are sometimes incorrect, this is not a serious problem. You should, however, memorize the conﬁgurations of two exceptions, chromium and copper, since these 3d transition elements are
found in many important compounds.

Metals and nonmetals were ﬁrst
discussed in Chapter 2.

3. As we mentioned in Chapter 2, certain groups in the periodic table have special names.
These are summarized in Fig. 7.35. Groups are often referred to by these names, so
you should learn them.
4. The most basic division of the elements in the periodic table is into metals and nonmetals. The most important chemical property of a metal atom is the tendency to
give up one or more electrons to form a positive ion; metals tend to have low ionization energies. The metallic elements are found on the left side of the table, as
shown in Fig. 7.35. The most chemically reactive metals are found on the lower lefthand portion of the table, where the ionization energies are smallest. The most
distinctive chemical property of a nonmetal atom is the ability to gain one or more
electrons to form an anion when reacting with a metal. Thus nonmetals are elements

316

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
with large ionization energies and the most negative electron afﬁnities. The nonmetals
are found on the right side of the table, with the most reactive ones in the upper
right-hand corner, except for the noble gas elements, which are quite unreactive. The
division into metals and nonmetals shown in Fig. 7.35 is only approximate. Many
elements along the division line exhibit both metallic and nonmetallic properties under certain circumstances. These elements are often called metalloids, or sometimes
semimetals.

The Alkali Metals

Hydrogen will be discussed further in
Chapter 19.

Other groups will be discussed in
Chapters 19 and 20.

Oxidation–reduction reactions were
discussed in Chapter 4.

The metals of Group 1A, the alkali metals, illustrate very well the relationships among
the properties of the elements in a group. Lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium,
and francium are the most chemically reactive of the metals. We will not discuss francium here because it occurs in nature in only very small quantities. Although hydrogen is
found in Group 1A of the periodic table, it behaves as a nonmetal, in contrast to the other
members of that group. The fundamental reason for hydrogen’s nonmetallic character is
its very small size (see Fig. 7.34). The electron in the small 1s orbital is bound tightly to
the nucleus.
Some important properties of the ﬁrst ﬁve alkali metals are shown in Table 7.8. The
data in Table 7.8 show that in going down the group, the ﬁrst ionization energy decreases
and the atomic radius increases. This agrees with the general trends discussed in Section 7.12.
The overall increase in density in going down Group 1A is typical of all groups. This
occurs because atomic mass generally increases more rapidly than atomic size. Thus there
is more mass per unit volume for each succeeding element.
The smooth decrease in melting point and boiling point in going down Group 1A is
not typical; in most other groups more complicated behavior occurs. Note that the melting point of cesium is only 29C. Cesium can be melted readily using only the heat from
your hand. This is very unusual—metals typically have rather high melting points. For
example, tungsten melts at 3410C. The only other metals with low melting points are
mercury (mp 38C) and gallium (mp 30C).
The chemical property most characteristic of a metal is the ability to lose its valence
electrons. The Group 1A elements are very reactive. They have low ionization energies
and react with nonmetals to form ionic solids. A typical example involves the reaction of
sodium with chlorine to form sodium chloride:
2Na1s2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2NaCl1s2
where sodium chloride contains Na and Cl ions. This is an oxidation–reduction reaction in which chlorine oxidizes sodium. In the reactions between metals and nonmetals,

TABLE 7.8

Properties of Five Alkali Metals

Element

Valence
Electron
Conﬁguration

Density
at 25⬚C
(g/cm3)

mp
(⬚C)

Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs

2s1
3s1
4s1
5s1
6s1

0.53
0.97
0.86
1.53
1.87

180
98
64
39
29

bp
(⬚C)

First
Ionization
Energy
(kJ/mol)

Atomic
(covalent)
Radius
(pm)

Ionic (M⫹)
Radius
(pm)

1330
892
760
668
690

520
495
419
409
382

152
186
227
247
265

60
95
133
148
169

7.13 The Properties of a Group: The Alkali Metals

317

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Potassium—Too Much of a Good Thing Can Kill You
otassium is widely recognized as an
essential element. In fact, our daily
requirement for potassium is more than
twice that for sodium. Because most
foods contain potassium, serious deﬁciency of this element in humans is rare.
However, potassium deﬁciency can
be caused by kidney malfunction or by
the use of certain diuretics. Potassium
deﬁciency leads to muscle weakness, irregular heartbeat, and depression.
Potassium is found in the ﬂuids of
the body as the K ion, and its presence
is essential to the operation of our nervous system. The passage of impulses
along the nerves requires the ﬂow of K
(and Na) through channels in the membranes of the nerve cells. Failure of this
ion ﬂow prevents nerve transmissions
The black mamba snake’s venom kills by blocking the potassium channels in the nerve cells
and results in death. For example, the of victims.
black mamba snake kills its victims by
injecting a venom that blocks the potasthe ﬂuids surrounding the cells and prevents the essential ﬂow
sium channels in the nerve cells.
of K out the cells to allow nerve impulses to occur. This
Although a steady intake of potassium is essential to pre- causes the heart to stop beating. Unlike other forms of execuserve life, ironically, too much potassium can be lethal. In fact, tion, death by lethal injection of potassium chloride does not
the deadly ingredient in the drug mixture used for executing harm the organs of the body. Thus condemned criminals who
criminals is potassium chloride. Injection of a large amount of are executed in this manner could potentially donate their ora potassium chloride solution produces an excess of K ion in gans for transplants. However, this idea is very controversial.

P

it is typical for the nonmetal to behave as the oxidizing agent and the metal to behave as
the reducing agent, as shown by the following reactions:
2Na1s2  S1s2 ¡ Na2S1s2

Contains Na and S2 ions

6Li1s2  N2 1g2 ¡ 2Li3N1s2

Contains Li and N3 ions

2Na1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ Na2O2 1s2

Contains Na and O22 ions

For reactions of the types just shown, the relative reducing powers of the alkali metals can be predicted from the ﬁrst ionization energies listed in Table 7.8. Since it is much
easier to remove an electron from a cesium atom than from a lithium atom, cesium should
be the better reducing agent. The expected trend in reducing ability is
Cs 7 Rb 7 K 7 Na 7 Li
Potassium reacts violently with water.

This order is observed experimentally for direct reactions between the solid alkali metals
and nonmetals. However, this is not the order for reducing ability found when the alkali

318

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

TABLE 7.9 Hydration Energies
for Li⫹, Na⫹, and K⫹ Ions
Ion

Hydration Energy
(kJ/mol)



Li
Na
K

510
402
314

metals react in aqueous solution. For example, the reduction of water by an alkali metal
is very vigorous and exothermic:
2M1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ H2 1g2  2M 1aq2  2OH 1aq2  energy
The order of reducing abilities observed for this reaction for the ﬁrst three group members is
Li 7 K 7 Na
In the gas phase potassium loses an electron more easily than sodium, and sodium more
easily than lithium. Thus it is surprising that lithium is the best reducing agent toward water.
This reversal occurs because the formation of the M ions in aqueous solution is
strongly inﬂuenced by the hydration of these ions by the polar water molecules. The hydration energy of an ion represents the change in energy that occurs when water molecules attach to the M ion. The hydration energies for the Li, Na, and K ions (shown
in Table 7.9) indicate that the process is exothermic in each case. However, nearly twice
as much energy is released by the hydration of the Li ion as for the K ion. This difference
is caused by size effects; the Li ion is much smaller than the K ion, and thus its charge
density (charge per unit volume) is also much greater. This means that the polar water
molecules are more strongly attracted to the small Li ion. Because the Li ion is so
strongly hydrated, its formation from the lithium atom occurs more readily than the
formation of the K ion from the potassium atom. Although a potassium atom in the
gas phase loses its valence electron more readily than a lithium atom in the gas phase,
the opposite is true in aqueous solution. This anomaly is an example of the importance
of the polarity of the water molecule in aqueous reactions.
There is one more surprise involving the highly exothermic reactions of the alkali
metals with water. Experiments show that in water lithium is the best reducing agent, so
we might expect that lithium should react the most violently with water. However, this is
not true. Sodium and potassium react much more vigorously. Why is this so? The answer
lies in the relatively high melting point of lithium. When sodium and potassium react with
water, the heat evolved causes them to melt, giving a larger area of contact with water.
Lithium, on the other hand, does not melt under these conditions and reacts more slowly.
This illustrates the important principle (which we will discuss in detail in Chapter 12) that
the energy change for a reaction and the rate at which it occurs are not necessarily related.
In this section we have seen that the trends in atomic properties summarized by the
periodic table can be a great help in understanding the chemical behavior of the elements.
This fact will be emphasized over and over as we proceed in our study of chemistry.

Key Terms

For Review

Section 7.1
electromagnetic radiation
wavelength
frequency

Electromagnetic radiation
8
䊉 Characterized by its wavelength (␭), frequency (␯), and speed (c  2.9979  10 m/s)

Section 7.2
Planck’s constant
quantization
photon
photoelectric effect
E  mc2
dual nature of light
diffraction
diffraction pattern

Section 7.3
continuous spectrum
line spectrum

␭␯  c
䊉

Can be viewed as a stream of “particles” called photons, each with energy h, where
h is Planck’s constant (6.626  1034 J  s)

Photoelectric effect
䊉 When light strikes a metal surface, electrons are emitted
䊉 Analysis of the kinetic energy and numbers of the emitted electrons led Einstein
to suggest that electromagnetic radiation can be viewed as a stream of photons
Hydrogen spectrum
䊉 The emission spectrum of hydrogen shows discrete wavelengths
䊉 Indicates that hydrogen has discrete energy levels

For Review
Section 7.4
quantum model
ground state

Section 7.5
standing wave
wave function
orbital
quantum (wave) mechanical model
Heisenberg uncertainty principle
probability distribution
radial probability distribution

Section 7.6
quantum numbers
principal quantum number (n)
angular momentum quantum number (ᐉ)
magnetic quantum number (mᐉ)
subshell

Section 7.7
nodal surface
node
degenerate orbital

Section 7.8
electron spin
electron spin quantum number
Pauli exclusion principle

Section 7.9
polyelectronic atoms

Section 7.11
aufbau principle
Hund’s rule
valence electrons
core electrons
transition metals
lanthanide series
actinide series
main-group elements (representative
elements)

Section 7.12
ﬁrst ionization energy
second ionization energy
electron afﬁnity
atomic radii

Section 7.13
metalloids (semimetals)

319

Bohr model of the hydrogen atom
䊉 Using the data from the hydrogen spectrum and assuming angular momentum to be
quantized, Bohr devised a model in which the electron traveled in circular orbits
䊉 Although an important pioneering effort, this model proved to be entirely incorrect
Wave (quantum) mechanical model
䊉 An electron is described as a standing wave
䊉 The square of the wave function (often called an orbital) gives a probability distribution for the electron position
䊉 The exact position of the electron is never known, which is consistent with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle: it is impossible to know accurately both the position and
the momentum of a particle simultaneously
䊉 Probability maps are used to deﬁne orbital shapes
䊉 Orbitals are characterized by the quantum numbers n, ᐉ, and mᐉ
Electron spin
1
䊉 Described by the spin quantum number ms which can have values of 2
䊉 Pauli exclusion principle: no two electrons in a given atom can have the same set of
quantum numbers n, ᐉ, mᐉ, and ms
䊉 Only two electrons with opposite spins can occupy a given orbital
Periodic table
䊉 By populating the orbitals from the wave mechanical model (the aufbau principle),
the form of the periodic table can be explained
䊉 According to the wave mechanical model, atoms in a given group have the same valence (outer) electron conﬁguration
䊉 The trends in properties such as ionization energies and atomic radii can be explained
in terms of the concepts of nuclear attraction, electron repulsions, shielding, and
penetration

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Four types of electromagnetic radiation (EMR) are ultraviolet, microwaves,
gamma rays, and visible. All of these types of EMR can be characterized by
wavelength, frequency, photon energy, and speed of travel. Deﬁne these terms
and rank the four types of electromagnetic radiation in order of increasing wavelength, frequency, photon energy, and speed.
2. Characterize the Bohr model of the atom. In the Bohr model, what do we
mean when we say something is quantized? How does the Bohr model of the
hydrogen atom explain the hydrogen emission spectrum? Why is the Bohr
model fundamentally incorrect?
3. What experimental evidence supports the quantum theory of light? Explain the
wave-particle duality of all matter. For what size particles must one consider
both the wave and the particle properties?
4. List the most important ideas of the quantum mechanical model of the atom. Include in your discussion the terms or names wave function, orbital, Heisenberg
uncertainty principle, de Broglie, Schrödinger, and probability distribution.
5. What are quantum numbers? What information do we get from the quantum
numbers n, ᐉ, and mᐉ? We deﬁne a spin quantum number (ms), but do we know
that an electron literally spins?
6. How do 2p orbitals differ from each other? How do 2p and 3p orbitals differ
from each other? What is a nodal surface in an atomic orbital? What is wrong
with 1p, 1d, 2d, 1f, 2f, and 3f orbitals? Explain what we mean when we say that
a 4s electron is more penetrating than a 3d electron.

320

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

7. Four blocks of elements in a periodic table refer to various atomic orbitals being
ﬁlled. What are the four blocks and the corresponding orbitals? How do you get
the energy ordering of the atomic orbitals from the periodic table? What is the
aufbau principle? Hund’s rule? The Pauli exclusion principle? There are two
common exceptions to the ground-state electron conﬁguration for elements 1–36
as predicted by the periodic table. What are they?
8. What is the difference between core electrons and valence electrons? Why do
we emphasize the valence electrons in an atom when discussing atomic properties? What is the relationship between valence electrons and elements in the
same group of the periodic table?
9. Using the element phosphorus as an example, write the equation for a process in
which the energy change will correspond to the ionization energy and to the
electron afﬁnity.
Explain why the ﬁrst ionization energy tends to increase as one proceeds
from left to right across a period. Why is the ﬁrst ionization energy of aluminum
lower than that of magnesium, and the ﬁrst ionization energy of sulfur lower
than that of phosphorus?
Why do the successive ionization energies of an atom always increase? Note
the successive ionization energies for silicon given in Table 7.5. Would you expect to see any large jumps between successive ionization energies of silicon as
you removed all the electrons, one by one, beyond those shown in the table?
10. The radius trend and the ionization energy trend are exact opposites. Does this
make sense? Deﬁne electron afﬁnity. Electron afﬁnity values are both exothermic (negative) and endothermic (positive). However, ionization energy values
are always endothermic (positive). Explain.

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the learning
that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical concepts.

1. What does it mean for something to have wavelike properties?
Particulate properties? Electromagnetic radiation can be discussed
in terms of both particles and waves. Explain the experimental
veriﬁcation for each of these views.
2. Defend and criticize Bohr’s model. Why was it reasonable that
such a model was proposed, and what evidence was there that it
“works”? Why do we no longer “believe” in it?
3. The ﬁrst four ionization energies for the elements X and Y are
shown below. The units are not kJ/mol.

First
Second
Third
Fourth

X

Y

170
350
1800
2500

200
400
3500
5000

Identify the elements X and Y. There may be more than one correct answer, so explain completely.

4. Compare the ﬁrst ionization energy of helium to its second ionization energy, remembering that both electrons come from the
1s orbital. Explain the difference without using actual numbers
from the text.
5. Which has the larger second ionization energy, lithium or beryllium? Why?
6. Explain why a graph of ionization energy versus atomic number
(across a row) is not linear. Where are the exceptions? Why are
there exceptions?
7. Without referring to your text, predict the trend of second ionization energies for the elements sodium through argon. Compare your answer with Table 7.5. Explain any differences.
8. Account for the fact that the line that separates the metals from
the nonmetals on the periodic table is diagonal downward to the
right instead of horizontal or vertical.
9. Explain electron from a quantum mechanical perspective, including a discussion of atomic radii, probabilities, and orbitals.
10. Choose the best response for the following. The ionization energy for the chlorine atom is equal in magnitude to the electron
afﬁnity for
a. the Cl atom.
b. the Cl ion.
c. the Cl ion.
d. the F atom.
e. none of these.

Exercises

11.

12.

13.
14.

Explain each choice. Justify your choice, and for the choices you
did not select, explain what is incorrect about them.
Consider the following statement: “The ionization energy for the
potassium atom is negative, because when K loses an electron
to become K, it achieves a noble gas electron conﬁguration.”
Indicate everything that is correct in this statement. Indicate
everything that is incorrect. Correct the incorrect information and
explain.
In going across a row of the periodic table, electrons are added
and ionization energy generally increases. In going down a column of the periodic table, electrons are also being added but ionization energy decreases. Explain.
How does probability ﬁt into the description of the atom?
What is meant by an orbital?

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of the book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
15. What type of relationship (direct or inverse) exists between wavelength, frequency, and photon energy? What does a photon energy unit of a Joule equal?
16. Explain the photoelectric effect.
17. How does the wavelength of a fast-pitched baseball compare to the
wavelength of an electron traveling at 1/10 the speed of light? What
is the signiﬁcance of this comparison? See Sample Exercise 7.3.
18. The Bohr model only works for one electron species. Why do
we discuss it in this text (what’s good about it)?
19. Describe the signiﬁcance of the radial probability distribution
shown in Fig. 7.12(b).
20. The periodic table consists of four blocks of elements which correspond to s, p, d, and f orbitals being ﬁlled. After f orbitals come
g and h orbitals. In theory, if a g block and an h block of elements
existed, how long would the rows of g and h elements be in this
theoretical periodic table?
21. Many times the claim is made that subshells half-ﬁlled with electrons are particularly stable. Can you suggest a possible physical basis for this claim?
22. Diagonal relationships in the periodic table exist as well as the
vertical relationships. For example, Be and Al are similar in some
of their properties, as are B and Si. Rationalize why these diagonal relationships hold for properties such as size, ionization energy, and electron afﬁnity.
23. Elements with very large ionization energies also tend to have
highly exothermic electron afﬁnities. Explain. Which group of
elements would you expect to be an exception to this statement?
24. The changes in electron afﬁnity as one goes down a group in the
periodic table are not nearly as large as the variations in ionization energies. Why?
25. Why is it much harder to explain the line spectra of polyelectronic atoms and ions than it is to explain the line spectra of hydrogen and hydrogenlike ions?
26. Scientists use emission spectra to conﬁrm the presence of an
element in materials of unknown composition. Why is this
possible?

321

27. Does the minimization of electron–electron repulsions correlate
with Hund’s rule?
28. In the hydrogen atom, what is the physical signiﬁcance of the
state for which n  q and E  0?
29. The work function is the energy required to remove an electron
from an atom on the surface of a metal. How does this deﬁnition differ from that for ionization energy?
30. Many more anhydrous lithium salts are hygroscopic (readily absorb water) than are those of the other alkali metals. Explain.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Light and Matter
31. Photosynthesis uses 660-nm light to convert CO2 and H2O into
glucose and O2. Calculate the frequency of this light.
32. An FM radio station broadcasts at 99.5 MHz. Calculate the wavelength of the corresponding radio waves.
33. Microwave radiation has a wavelength on the order of 1.0 cm.
Calculate the frequency and the energy of a single photon of this
radiation. Calculate the energy of an Avogadro’s number of photons (called an einstein) of this radiation.
34. A photon of ultraviolet (UV) light possesses enough energy to
mutate a strand of human DNA. What is the energy of a single
UV photon and a mole of UV photons having a wavelength of
25 nm?
35. Consider the following waves representing electromagnetic
radiation:

1.6 x 10–3 m

Wave a

Wave b

Which wave has the longer wavelength? Calculate the wavelength. Which wave has the higher frequency and larger photon
energy? Calculate these values. Which wave has the faster velocity? What type of electromagnetic radiation are illustrated?
36. One type of electromagnetic radiation has a frequency of
107.1 MHz, another type has a wavelength of 2.12  1010 m,
and another type of electromagnetic radiation has photons with
energy equal to 3.97  1019 J/photon. Identify each type of
electromagnetic radiation and place them in order of increasing
photon energy and increasing frequency.
37. Carbon absorbs energy at a wavelength of 150. nm. The total
amount of energy emitted by a carbon sample is 1.98  105 J.
Calculate the number of carbon atoms present in the sample, assuming that each atom emits one photon.

322

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

38. A carbon–oxygen double bond in a certain organic molecule absorbs radiation that has a frequency of 6.0  1013 s1.
a. What is the wavelength of this radiation?
b. To what region of the spectrum does this radiation belong?
c. What is the energy of this radiation per photon? Per mole of
photons?
d. A carbon–oxygen bond in a different molecule absorbs radiation with frequency equal to 5.4  1013 s1. Is this radiation
more or less energetic?
39. The work function of an element is the energy required to remove an electron from the surface of the solid element. The work
function for lithium is 279.7 kJ/mol (that is, it takes 279.7 kJ of
energy to remove one mole of electrons from one mole of Li
atoms on the surface of Li metal). What is the maximum wavelength of light that can remove an electron from an atom on the
surface of lithium metal?
40. It takes 208.4 kJ of energy to remove 1 mole of electrons from
an atom on the surface of rubidium metal. How much energy
does it take to remove a single electron from an atom on the surface of solid rubidium? What is the maximum wavelength of
light capable of doing this?
41. Calculate the de Broglie wavelength for each of the following.
a. an electron with a velocity 10.% of the speed of light
b. a tennis ball (55 g) served at 35 m/s (80 mi/h)
42. Neutron diffraction is used in determining the structures of
molecules.
a. Calculate the de Broglie wavelength of a neutron moving at
1.00% of the speed of light.
b. Calculate the velocity of a neutron with a wavelength of
75 pm (1 pm  1012 m).
43. A particle has a velocity that is 90.% of the speed of light. If the
wavelength of the particle is 1.5  1015 m, calculate the mass
of the particle.
44. Calculate the velocities of electrons with de Broglie wavelengths
of 1.0  102 nm and 1.0 nm, respectively.

Hydrogen Atom: The Bohr Model
45. Calculate the wavelength of light emitted when each of the
following transitions occur in the hydrogen atom. What type
of electromagnetic radiation is emitted in each transition?
a. n  3 S n  2
b. n  4 S n  2
c. n  2 S n  1
46. Calculate the wavelength of light emitted when each of the following transitions occur in the hydrogen atom. What type of electromagnetic radiation is emitted in each transition?
a. n  4 S n  3
b. n  5 S n  4
c. n  5 S n  3
47. Using vertical lines, indicate the transitions from Exercise 45 on
an energy-level diagram for the hydrogen atom (see Fig. 7.8).
48. Using vertical lines, indicate the transitions from Exercise
46 on an energy-level diagram for the hydrogen atom (see
Fig. 7.8).

49. Does a photon of visible light (␭  400 to 700 nm) have sufﬁcient energy to excite an electron in a hydrogen atom from the
n  1 to the n  5 energy state? from the n  2 to the n  6
energy state?
50. An electron is excited from the n  1 ground state to the n  3
state in a hydrogen atom. Which of the following statements are
true? Correct the false statements to make them true.
a. It takes more energy to ionize (completely remove) the electron from n  3 than from the ground state.
b. The electron is farther from the nucleus on average in the
n  3 state than in the n  1 state.
c. The wavelength of light emitted if the electron drops from
n  3 to n  2 will be shorter than the wavelength of light
emitted if the electron falls from n  3 to n  1.
d. The wavelength of light emitted when the electron returns to
the ground state from n  3 will be the same as the wavelength of light absorbed to go from n  1 to n  3.
e. For n  3, the electron is in the ﬁrst excited state.
51. Calculate the maximum wavelength of light capable of removing an electron for a hydrogen atom from the energy state characterized by n  1. by n  2.
52. Consider an electron for a hydrogen atom in an excited state. The
maximum wavelength of electromagnetic radiation that can completely remove (ionize) the electron from the H atom is 1460 nm.
What is the initial excited state for the electron (n  ?)?
53. An excited hydrogen atom with an electron in the n  5 state
emits light having a frequency of 6.90  1014 s1. Determine
the principal quantum level for the ﬁnal state in this electronic
transition.
54. An excited hydrogen atom emits light with a wavelength of
397.2 nm to reach the energy level for which n  2. In which
principal quantum level did the electron begin?

Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Numbers, and Orbitals
55. Using the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, calculate x for each
of the following.
a. an electron with ␷  0.100 m/s
b. a baseball (mass  145 g) with ␷  0.100 m/s
c. How does the answer in part a compare with the size of a
hydrogen atom?
d. How does the answer in part b correspond to the size of a
baseball?
56. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle can be expressed in
the form
¢E  ¢t 

h
4p

where E represents energy and t represents time. Show that the
units for this form are the same as the units for the form used
in this chapter:
¢x  ¢1my2 

h
4p

57. What are the possible values for the quantum numbers n, ᐉ,
and mᐉ?

Exercises
58. Which of the following orbital designations are incorrect: 1s, 1p,
7d, 9s, 3f, 4f, 2d?
59. Which of the following sets of quantum numbers are not allowed
in the hydrogen atom? For the sets of quantum numbers that are
incorrect, state what is wrong in each set.
a. n  3, /  2, m/  2
b. n  4, /  3, m/  4
c. n  0, /  0, m/  0
d. n  2, /  1, m/  1
60. Which of the following sets of quantum numbers are not allowed? For each incorrect set, state why it is incorrect.
a. n  3, /  3, m/  0, ms  12
b. n  4, /  3, m/  2, ms  12
c. n  4, /  1, m/  1, ms  12
d. n  2, /  1, m/  1, ms  1
e. n  5, /  4, m/  2, ms  12
f. n  3, /  1, m/  2, ms  12
61. What is the physical signiﬁcance of the value of ␺2 at a particular point in an atomic orbital?
62. In deﬁning the sizes of orbitals, why must we use an arbitrary
value, such as 90% of the probability of ﬁnding an electron in
that region?

Polyelectronic Atoms
63. How many orbitals in an atom can have the designation 5p, 3dz2,
4d, n  5, n  4?
64. How many electrons in an atom can have the designation 1p,
6dx2y2, 4f, 7py, 2s, n  3?
65. Give the maximum number of electrons in an atom that can have
these quantum numbers:
a. n  4
b. n  5, m/  1
c. n  5, ms  12
d. n  3, /  2
e. n  2, /  1
66. Give the maximum number of electrons in an atom that can have
these quantum numbers:
a. n  0, /  0, m/  0
b. n  2, /  1, m/  1, ms  12
c. n  3, ms  12
d. n  2, /  2
e. n  1, /  0, m/  0
67. Draw atomic orbital diagrams representing the ground-state electron conﬁguration for each of the following elements.
a. Na
b. Co
c. Kr
How many unpaired electrons are present in each element?
68. For elements 1–36, there are two exceptions to the ﬁlling order
as predicted from the periodic table. Draw the atomic orbital diagrams for the two exceptions and indicate how many unpaired
electrons are present.

323

69. The elements Si, Ga, As, Ge, Al, Cd, S, and Se are all used in
the manufacture of various semiconductor devices. Write the expected electron conﬁguration for these atoms.
70. The elements Cu, O, La, Y, Ba, Tl, and Bi are all found in hightemperature ceramic superconductors. Write the expected electron conﬁguration for these atoms.
71. Write the expected electron conﬁgurations for each of the following atoms: Sc, Fe, P, Cs, Eu, Pt, Xe, Br.
72. Write the expected electron conﬁgurations for each of the following atoms: Cl, Sb, Sr, W, Pb, Cf.
73. Write the expected ground-state electron conﬁguration for the
following.
a. the element with one unpaired 5p electron that forms a covalent with compound ﬂuorine
b. the (as yet undiscovered) alkaline earth metal after radium
c. the noble gas with electrons occupying 4f orbitals
d. the ﬁrst-row transition metal with the most unpaired electrons
74. Using only the periodic table inside the front cover of the text,
write the expected ground-state electron conﬁgurations for
a. the third element in Group 5A.
b. element number 116.
c. an element with three unpaired 5d electrons.
d. the halogen with electrons in the 6p atomic orbitals.
75. In
a.
b.
c.
d.
76. In
a.

the ground state of mercury, Hg,
how many electrons occupy atomic orbitals with n  3?
how many electrons occupy d atomic orbitals?
how many electrons occupy pz atomic orbitals?
how many electrons have spin “up” ( ms   12 )?
the ground state of element 115, Uup,
how many electrons have n  5 as one of their quantum
numbers?
b. how many electrons have ᐉ  3 as one of their quantum
numbers?
c. how many electrons have mᐉ  1 as one of their quantum
numbers?
d. how many electrons have ms  12 as one of their quantum
numbers?

77. Give a possible set of values of the four quantum numbers for
all the electrons in a boron atom and a nitrogen atom if each is
in the ground state.
78. Give a possible set of values of the four quantum numbers for
the 4s and 3d electrons in titanium.
79. A certain oxygen atom has the electron conﬁguration
1s22s22px22py2. How many unpaired electrons are present? Is this
an excited state of oxygen? In going from this state to the ground
state would energy be released or absorbed?
80. Which of the following electron conﬁgurations correspond to an
excited state? Identify the atoms and write the ground-state electron conﬁguration where appropriate.
a. 1s22s23p1
b. 1s22s22p6
c. 1s22s22p43s1
d. [Ar]4s23d54p1
How many unpaired electrons are present in each of these species?

324

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity

81. Which
ground
82. Which
ground

of elements 1–36 have two unpaired electrons in the
state?
of elements 1–36 have one unpaired electron in the
state?

83. One bit of evidence that the quantum mechanical model is
“correct” lies in the magnetic properties of matter. Atoms with
unpaired electrons are attracted by magnetic ﬁelds and thus are
said to exhibit paramagnetism. The degree to which this effect
is observed is directly related to the number of unpaired electrons present in the atom. Consider the ground-state electron
conﬁgurations for Li, N, Ni, Te, Ba, and Hg. Which of these
atoms would be expected to be paramagnetic, and how many
unpaired electrons are present in each paramagnetic atom?
84. How many unpaired electrons are present in each of the following in the ground state: O, O, O, Os, Zr, S, F, Ar?

The Periodic Table and Periodic Properties
85. Arrange the following groups of atoms in order of increasing
size.
a. Te, S, Se
b. K, Br, Ni
c. Ba, Si, F
86. Arrange the following groups of atoms in order of increasing
size.
a. Rb, Na, Be
b. Sr, Se, Ne
c. Fe, P, O
87. Arrange the atoms in Exercise 85 in order of increasing ﬁrst ionization energy.
88. Arrange the atoms in Exercise 86 in order of increasing ﬁrst ionization energy.
89. In each of the following sets, which atom or ion has the smallest radius?
a. H, He
b. Cl, In, Se
c. element 120, element 119, element 117
d. Nb, Zn, Si
e. Na, Na, Na
90. In each of the following sets, which atom or ion has the smallest ionization energy?
a. Ca, Sr, Ba
b. K, Mn, Ga
c. N, O, F
d. S2, S, S2
e. Cs, Ge, Ar
91. Element 106 has been named seaborgium, Sg, in honor of Glenn
Seaborg, discoverer of the ﬁrst transuranium element.
a. Write the expected electron conﬁguration for element 106.
b. What other element would be most like element 106 in its
properties?
c. Write the formula for a possible oxide and a possible oxyanion of element 106.
92. Predict some of the properties of element 117 (the symbol is
Uus, following conventions proposed by the International Union
of Pure and Applied Chemistry, or IUPAC).

a. What will be its electron conﬁguration?
b. What element will it most resemble chemically?
c. What will be the formula of the neutral binary compounds it
forms with sodium, magnesium, carbon, and oxygen?
d. What oxyanions would you expect Uus to form?
93. The ﬁrst ionization energies of As and Se are 0.947 and 0.941
MJ/mol, respectively. Rationalize these values in terms of electron conﬁgurations.
94. Rank the elements Be, B, C, N, and O in order of increasing ﬁrst
ionization energy. Explain your reasoning.
95. For each of the following pairs of elements
1C and N2

1Ar and Br2

pick the atom with
a. more favorable (exothermic) electron afﬁnity.
b. higher ionization energy.
c. larger size.
96. For each of the following pairs of elements
1Mg and K2

1F and Cl2

pick the atom with
a. more favorable (exothermic) electron afﬁnity.
b. higher ionization energy.
c. larger size.
97. The electron afﬁnities of the elements from aluminum to chlorine are 44, 120, 74, 200.4, and 384.7 kJ/mol, respectively. Rationalize the trend in these values.
98. The electron afﬁnity for sulfur is more exothermic than that for
oxygen. How do you account for this?
99. Order each of the following sets from the least exothermic electron afﬁnity to the most exothermic electron afﬁnity.
a. F, Cl, Br, I
b. N, O, F
100. Which has the more negative electron afﬁnity, the oxygen atom
or the O ion? Explain your answer.
101. Write equations corresponding to the following.
a. The fourth ionization energy of Se
b. The electron afﬁnity of S
c. The electron afﬁnity of Fe3
d. The ionization energy of Mg
102. Using data from the text, determine the following values (justify
your answer):
a. the electron afﬁnity of Mg2
b. the ionization energy of Cl
c. the electron afﬁnity of Cl
d. the ionization energy of Mg (Electron afﬁnity of Mg 
230 kJ/mol)

Alkali Metals
103. An ionic compound of potassium and oxygen has the empirical
formula KO. Would you expect this compound to be potassium(II) oxide or potassium peroxide? Explain.
104. Give the name and formula of each of the binary compounds
formed from the following elements.
a. Li and N
b. Na and Br
c. K and S

Additional Exercises

109. Complete and balance the equations for the following reactions.
a. Li1s2  N2 1g2 S
b. Rb1s2  S1s2 S
110. Complete and balance the equations for the following reactions.
a. Cs1s2  H2O1l2 S
b. Na1s2  Cl2 1g2 S

Additional Exercises
111. Photogray lenses incorporate small amounts of silver chloride in
the glass of the lens. When light hits the AgCl particles, the
following reaction occurs:
hv

AgCl ¡ Ag  Cl
The silver metal that is formed causes the lenses to darken. The
enthalpy change for this reaction is 3.10  102 kJ/mol. Assuming all this energy must be supplied by light, what is the maximum wavelength of light that can cause this reaction?
112. A certain microwave oven delivers 750. watts (joule/s) of power
to a coffee cup containing 50.0 g of water at 25.0C. If the wavelength of microwaves in the oven is 9.75 cm, how long does it
take, and how many photons must be absorbed, to make the water boil? The speciﬁc heat capacity of water is 4.18 J/C  g and
assume only the water absorbs the energy of the microwaves.
113. Mars is roughly 60 million km from earth. How long does it take
for a radio signal originating from earth to reach Mars?
114. Consider the following approximate visible light spectrum:
Wavelength 7 x 10–5

Infrared

Red

6 x 10–5

Orange

Yellow

5 x 10–5

Green

Blue

4 x 10–5

Violet

cm

Ultraviolet

Barium emits light in the visible region of the spectrum. If each
photon of light emitted from barium has an energy of 3.59 
1019 J, what color of visible light is emitted?
115. One of the visible lines in the hydrogen emission spectrum corresponds to the n  6 to n  2 electronic transition. What color
light is this transition? See Exercise 114.

Ar
Radial electron density

107. Does the information on alkali metals in Table 7.8 of the text
conﬁrm the general periodic trends in ionization energy and
atomic radius? Explain.
108. Predict the atomic number of the next alkali metal after francium and give its ground-state electron conﬁguration.

116. Using Fig. 7.28, list the elements (ignore the lanthanides and actinides) that have ground-state electron conﬁgurations that differ from those we would expect from their positions in the
periodic table.
117. Are the following statements true for the hydrogen atom only,
true for all atoms, or not true for any atoms?
a. The principal quantum number completely determines the
energy of a given electron.
b. The angular momentum quantum number, ᐉ, determines the
shapes of the atomic orbitals.
c. The magnetic quantum number, mᐉ, determines the direction
that the atomic orbitals point in space.
118. Although no currently known elements contain electrons in g orbitals in the ground state, it is possible that these elements will
be found or that electrons in excited states of known elements
could be in g orbitals. For g orbitals, the value of ᐉ is 4. What
is the lowest value of n for which g orbitals could exist? What
are the possible values of mᐉ? How many electrons could a set
of g orbitals hold?
119. Consider the representations of the p and d atomic orbitals in
Figs. 7.14 and 7.16. What do the  and  signs indicate?
120. Total radial probability distributions for the helium, neon, and
argon atoms are shown in the following graph. How can one interpret the shapes of these curves in terms of electron conﬁgurations, quantum numbers, and nuclear charges?

Ne

He
0

0.5
Distance from nucleus (Å)

1.0

121. The following graph plots the ﬁrst, second, and third ionization
energies for Mg, Al, and Si.

Ionization energy (kJ/mol)

105. Cesium was discovered in natural mineral waters in 1860 by
R. W. Bunsen and G. R. Kirchhoff using the spectroscope they
invented in 1859. The name came from the Latin caesius (“sky
blue”) because of the prominent blue line observed for this
element at 455.5 nm. Calculate the frequency and energy of a
photon of this light.
106. The bright yellow light emitted by a sodium vapor lamp consists
of two emission lines at 589.0 and 589.6 nm. What are the frequency and the energy of a photon of light at each of these wavelengths? What are the energies in kJ/mol?

325

1

2
Number of electrons removed

3

Without referencing the text, which plot corresponds to which
element? In one of the plots, there is a huge jump in energy

326

122.

123.

124.

125.

Chapter Seven Atomic Structure and Periodicity
between I2 and I3, unlike in the other two plots. Explain this
phenomenon.
An ion having a 4 charge and a mass of 49.9 amu has 2 electrons with principal quantum number n  1, 8 electrons with
n  2, and 10 electrons with n  3. Supply as many of the properties for the ion as possible from the information given. Hint:
In forming ions for this species, the 4s electrons are lost before
the 3d electrons.
a. the atomic number
b. total number of s electrons
c. total number of p electrons
d. total number of d electrons
e. the number of neutrons in the nucleus
f. the ground-state electron conﬁguration of the neutral atom
The successive ionization energies for an unknown element are
I1  896 kJ/mol
I2  1752 kJ/mol
I3  14,807 kJ/mol
I4  17,948 kJ/mol
To which family in the periodic table does the unknown element
most likely belong?
An unknown element is a nonmetal and has a valence electron
conﬁguration of ns2np4.
a. How many valence electrons does this element have?
b. What are some possible identities for this element?
c. What is the formula of the compound this element would form
with potassium?
d. Would this element have a larger or smaller radius than barium?
e. Would this element have a greater or smaller ionization
energy than ﬂuorine?
Using data from this chapter, calculate the change in energy
expected for each of the following processes.
a. Na1g2  Cl1g2 S Na 1g2  Cl 1g2
b. Mg1g2  F1g2 S Mg 1g2  F 1g2
c. Mg 1g2  F1g2 S Mg2 1g2  F 1g2
d. Mg1g2  2F1g2 S Mg2 1g2  2F 1g2

a. What electronic transitions correspond to lines A and B?
b. If the wavelength of line B is 142.5 nm, calculate the wavelength of line A.
128. When the excited electron in a hydrogen atom falls from n  5
to n  2, a photon of blue light is emitted. if an excited electron in He falls from n  4, to which energy level must it fall
so that a similar blue light (as with the hydrogen) is emitted?
Prove it. (See Exercise 126.)
129. The wave function for the 2pz orbital in the hydrogen atom is
c2pz 

Z 3 2 s 2
b se
cos u
422p a0
1

a

where a0 is the value for the radius of the ﬁrst Bohr orbit in meters (5.29  1011), ␴ is Z(ra0), r is the value for the distance
from the nucleus in meters, and ␪ is an angle. Calculate the value
of ␺2pz2 at r  a0 for ␪  0 (z axis) and for ␪  90 (xy plane).
130. Answer the following questions assuming that ms could have
three values rather than two and that the rules for n, ᐉ, and mᐉ
are the normal ones.
a. How many electrons would an orbital be able to hold?
b. How many elements would the ﬁrst and second periods in the
periodic table contain?
c. How many elements would be contained in the ﬁrst transition metal series?
d. How many electrons would the set of 4f orbitals be able to
hold?
131. Assume that we are in another universe with different physical
laws. Electrons in this universe are described by four quantum
numbers with meanings similar to those we use. We will call
these quantum numbers p, q, r, and s. The rules for these quantum numbers are as follows:
p  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . . .
q takes on positive odd integer and q  p.
r takes on all even integer values from q to q. (Zero is
considered an even number.)
s   12 or 12

Challenge Problems
3

126. One of the emission spectral lines for Be has a wavelength of
253.4 nm for an electronic transition that begins in the state with
n  5. What is the principal quantum number of the lower-energy
state corresponding to this emission? (Hint: The Bohr model
can be applied to one-electron ions. Don’t forget the Z factor:
Z  nuclear charge  atomic number.)
127. The ﬁgure below represents part of the emission spectrum for a oneelectron ion in the gas phase. All the lines result from electronic
transitions from excited states to the n  3 state. (See Exercise 126.)
A

B

Wavelength

a. Sketch what the ﬁrst four periods of the periodic table will
look like in this universe.
b. What are the atomic numbers of the ﬁrst four elements you
would expect to be least reactive?
c. Give an example, using elements in the ﬁrst four rows, of
ionic compounds with the formulas XY, XY2, X2Y, XY3, and
X2Y3.
d. How many electrons can have p  4, q  3?
e. How many electrons can have p  3, q  0, r  0?
f. How many electrons can have p  6?
132. Without looking at data in the text, sketch a qualitative graph of
the third ionization energy versus atomic number for the elements Na through Ar, and explain your graph.
133. The following numbers are the ratios of second ionization energy to ﬁrst ionization energy:
Na:
Mg:
Al:
Si:

9.2
2.0
3.1
2.0

Marathon Problem
P:
S:
Cl:
Ar:

1.8
2.3
1.8
1.8

Explain these relative numbers.
134. We expect the atomic radius to increase going down a group in
the periodic table. Can you suggest why the atomic radius of
hafnium breaks this rule? (See data below.)

Atomic Radii, in pm
Sc
Y
La

157
169.3
191.5

Ti
Zr
Hf

147.7
159.3
147.6

327

139. Francium, Fr, is a radioactive element found in some uranium
minerals and is formed as a result of the decay of actinium.
a. What are the electron conﬁgurations of francium and its predicted most common ion?
b. It has been estimated that at any one time, there is only one
(1.0) ounce of francium on earth. Assuming this is true, what
number of francium atoms exist on earth?
c. The longest-lived isotope of francium is 223Fr. What is the total
mass in grams of the neutrons in one atom of this isotope?
140. Answer the following questions based on the given electron conﬁgurations and identify the elements.
a. Arrange these atoms in order of increasing size:
[Kr]5s24d105p6; [Kr]5s24d105p1; [Kr]5s24d105p3.
b. Arrange these atoms in order of decreasing ﬁrst ionization
energy: [Ne]3s23p5; [Ar]4s23d104p3; [Ar]4s23d104p5.

Marathon Problem*
135. Consider the following ionization energies for aluminum:
Al1g2 ¡ Al 1g2  e

Al 1g2 ¡ Al2 1g2  e

Al 1g2 ¡ Al 1g2  e
2

3



Al3 1g2 ¡ Al4 1g2  e

I1  580 kJ/mol
I2  1815 kJ/mol
I3  2740 kJ/mol
I4  11,600 kJ/mol

a. Account for the trend in the values of the ionization energies.
b. Explain the large increase between I3 and I4.
c. Which one of the four ions has the greatest electron afﬁnity?
Explain.
d. List the four aluminum ions given in order of increasing size,
and explain your ordering. (Hint: Remember that most of the
size of an atom or ion is due to its electrons.)
136. While Mendeleev predicted the existence of several undiscovered elements, he did not predict the existence of the noble gases,
the lanthanides, or the actinides. Propose reasons why Mendeleev
was not able to predict the existence of the noble gases.
137. An atom of a particular element is traveling at 1.00% of the speed
of light. The de Broglie wavelength is found to be 3.31  103 pm.
Which element is this? Prove it.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

138. As the weapons ofﬁcer aboard the Starship Chemistry, it is your
duty to conﬁgure a photon torpedo to remove an electron from
the outer hull of an enemy vessel. You know that the work function (the binding energy of the electron) of the hull of the enemy
ship is 7.52  1019 J.
a. What wavelength does your photon torpedo need to be to eject
an electron?
b. You ﬁnd an extra photon torpedo with a wavelength of 259 nm
and ﬁre it at the enemy vessel. Does this photon torpedo do
any damage to the ship (does it eject an electron)?
c. If the hull of the enemy vessel is made of the element with
an electron conﬁguration of [Ar]4s13d10, what metal is this?

This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

141. From the information below, identify element X.
a. The wavelength of the radio waves sent by an FM station
broadcasting at 97.1 MHz is 30.0 million (3.00  107) times
greater than the wavelength corresponding to the energy difference between a particular excited state of the hydrogen
atom and the ground state.
b. Let V represent the principal quantum number for the valence
shell of element X. If an electron in the hydrogen atom
falls from shell V to the inner shell corresponding to the excited state mentioned above in part a, the wavelength of light
emitted is the same as the wavelength of an electron moving
at a speed of 570. m/s.
c. The number of unpaired electrons for element X in the ground
state is the same as the maximum number of electrons in an
atom that can have the quantum number designations n  2,
mᐉ  1, and ms  12 .
d. Let A equal the charge of the stable ion that would form when
the undiscovered element 120 forms ionic compounds. This
value of A also represents the angular momentum quantum
number for the subshell containing the unpaired electron(s)
for element X.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education,
Vol. 68, No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of
Chemical Education, Inc.

8 Bonding: General Concepts
Contents
8.1 Types of Chemical Bonds
8.2 Electronegativity
8.3 Bond Polarity and Dipole
Moments
8.4 Ions: Electron
Conﬁgurations and Sizes
• Predicting Formulas of Ionic
Compounds
• Sizes of Ions
8.5 Energy Effects in Binary
Ionic Compounds
• Lattice Energy Calculations
8.6 Partial Ionic Character of
Covalent Bonds
8.7 The Covalent Chemical
Bond: A Model
• Models: An Overview
8.8 Covalent Bond Energies and
Chemical Reactions
• Bond Energy and Enthalpy
8.9 The Localized Electron
Bonding Model
8.10 Lewis Structures
8.11 Exceptions to the Octet Rule
8.12 Resonance
• Odd-Electron Molecules
• Formal Charge
8.13 Molecular Structure: The
VSEPR Model
• The VSEPR Model and
Multiple Bonds
• Molecules Containing No
Single Central Atom
• The VSEPR Model—-How
Well Does It Work?

Carbon forms very stable spherical C60 molecules.

328

A

s we examine the world around us, we ﬁnd it to be composed almost entirely of
compounds and mixtures of compounds: Rocks, coal, soil, petroleum, trees, and human
bodies are all complex mixtures of chemical compounds in which different kinds of atoms
are bound together. Substances composed of unbound atoms do exist in nature, but they
are very rare. Examples are the argon in the atmosphere and the helium mixed with natural gas reserves.
The manner in which atoms are bound together has a profound effect on chemical
and physical properties. For example, graphite is a soft, slippery material used as a lubricant in locks, and diamond is one of the hardest materials known, valuable both as a
gemstone and in industrial cutting tools. Why do these materials, both composed solely
of carbon atoms, have such different properties? The answer, as we will see, lies in the
bonding in these substances.
Silicon and carbon are next to each other in Group 4A of the periodic table. From
our knowledge of periodic trends, we might expect SiO2 and CO2 to be very similar. But
SiO2 is the empirical formula of silica, which is found in sand and quartz, and carbon
dioxide is a gas, a product of respiration. Why are they so different? We will be able to
answer this question after we have developed models for bonding.
Molecular bonding and structure play the central role in determining the course of all
chemical reactions, many of which are vital to our survival. Later in this book we will
demonstrate their importance by showing how enzymes facilitate complex chemical reactions, how genetic characteristics are transferred, and how hemoglobin in the blood carries oxygen throughout the body. All of these fundamental biological reactions hinge on
the geometric structures of molecules, sometimes depending on very subtle differences in
molecular shape to channel the chemical reaction one way rather than another.
Many of the world’s current problems require fundamentally chemical answers:
disease and pollution control, the search for new energy sources, the development of new
fertilizers to increase crop yields, the improvement of the protein content in various staple
grains, and many more. To understand the behavior of natural materials, we must understand the nature of chemical bonding and the factors that control the structures of

Quartz grows in beautiful, regular crystals.

329

330

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
compounds. In this chapter we will present various classes of compounds that illustrate
the different types of bonds and then develop models to describe the structure and bonding that characterize materials found in nature. Later these models will be useful in understanding chemical reactions.

8.1

Types of Chemical Bonds

What is a chemical bond? There is no simple and yet complete answer to this question.
In Chapter 2 we deﬁned bonds as forces that hold groups of atoms together and make
them function as a unit.
There are many types of experiments we can perform to determine the fundamental
nature of materials. For example, we can study physical properties such as melting point,
hardness, and electrical and thermal conductivity. We can also study solubility characteristics and the properties of the resulting solutions. To determine the charge distribution in
a molecule, we can study its behavior in an electric ﬁeld. We can obtain information about
the strength of a bonding interaction by measuring the bond energy, which is the energy
required to break the bond.
There are several ways in which atoms can interact with one another to form aggregates. We will consider several speciﬁc examples to illustrate the various types of chemical bonds.
Earlier, we saw that when solid sodium chloride is dissolved in water, the resulting
solution conducts electricity, a fact that helps to convince us that sodium chloride is composed of Na and Cl ions. Therefore, when sodium and chlorine react to form sodium
chloride, electrons are transferred from the sodium atoms to the chlorine atoms to form
Na and Cl ions, which then aggregate to form solid sodium chloride. Why does this
happen? The best simple answer is that the system can achieve the lowest possible energy
by behaving in this way. The attraction of a chlorine atom for the extra electron and the
very strong mutual attractions of the oppositely charged ions provide the driving forces
for the process. The resulting solid sodium chloride is a very sturdy material; it has a melting point of approximately 800C. The bonding forces that produce this great thermal stability result from the electrostatic attractions of the closely packed, oppositely charged
ions. This is an example of ionic bonding. Ionic substances are formed when an atom
that loses electrons relatively easily reacts with an atom that has a high afﬁnity for electrons. That is, an ionic compound results when a metal reacts with a nonmetal.
The energy of interaction between a pair of ions can be calculated using Coulomb’s
law in the form
E  12.31  1019 J  nm2 a

Q1Q2
b
r

where E has units of joules, r is the distance between the ion centers in nanometers, and
Q1 and Q2 are the numerical ion charges.
For example, in solid sodium chloride the distance between the centers of the Na
and Cl ions is 2.76 Å (0.276 nm), and the ionic energy per pair of ions is
0.276 nm

Na+

E  12.31  1019 J  nm2 c
Cl–

112112
d  8.37  1019 J
0.276 nm

where the negative sign indicates an attractive force. That is, the ion pair has lower energy than the separated ions.
Coulomb’s law also can be used to calculate the repulsive energy when two likecharged ions are brought together. In this case the calculated value of the energy will have
a positive sign.
We have seen that a bonding force develops when two different types of atoms react to form oppositely charged ions. But how does a bonding force develop between two

8.1 Types of Chemical Bonds

+

331

+
H atom
Sufficiently far apart
to have no interaction

+

+

H atom

H atom

Energy (kJ/mol)

H atom

H

H

0
H

H H

H

The atoms begin to interact
as they move closer together.
H H

+

– 458

+

0

H2 molecule
(a)

Optimum distance to achieve
lowest overall energy of system

(b)

0.074

Internuclear distance (nm)

(H—H bond length)

FIGURE 8.1
(a) The interaction of two hydrogen atoms. (b) Energy proﬁle as a function of the distance between the nuclei of the hydrogen atoms.
As the atoms approach each other (right side of graph), the energy decreases until the distance reaches 0.074 nm (0.74 Å) and then begins
to increase again due to repulsions.

A bond will form if the energy of the
aggregate is lower than that of the
separated atoms.

Potential energy was discussed in
Chapter 6.

identical atoms? Let’s explore this situation from a very simple point of view by considering the energy terms that result when two hydrogen atoms are brought close together,
as shown in Fig. 8.1(a). When hydrogen atoms are brought close together, there are two
unfavorable potential energy terms, proton–proton repulsion and electron–electron
repulsion, and one favorable term, proton–electron attraction. Under what conditions will
the H2 molecule be favored over the separated hydrogen atoms? That is, what conditions
will favor bond formation? The answer lies in the strong tendency in nature for any
system to achieve the lowest possible energy. A bond will form (that is, the two hydrogen atoms will exist as a molecular unit) if the system can lower its total energy in the
process.
In this case, then, the hydrogen atoms will position themselves so that the system will
achieve the lowest possible energy; the system will act to minimize the sum of the positive (repulsive) energy terms and the negative (attractive) energy term. The distance where
the energy is minimal is called the bond length. The total energy of this system as a
function of distance between the hydrogen nuclei is shown in Fig. 8.1(b). Note several
important features of this diagram:
The energy terms involved are the net potential energy that results from the attractions and repulsions among the charged particles and the kinetic energy due to the
motions of the electrons.
The zero point of energy is deﬁned with the atoms at inﬁnite separation.
At very short distances the energy rises steeply because of the importance of the repulsive forces when the atoms are very close together.
The bond length is the distance at which the system has minimum energy.
In the H2 molecule, the electrons reside primarily in the space between the two nuclei, where they are attracted simultaneously by both protons. This positioning is precisely
what leads to the stability of the H2 molecule compared with two separated hydrogen

332

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

CHEMICAL IMPACT
No Lead Pencils
id you ever wonder why the part of a pencil that makes
the mark is called the “lead”? Pencils have no lead in
them now—and they never have. Apparently the association
between writing and the element lead arose during the Roman Empire, when lead rods were used as writing utensils
because they leave a gray mark on paper. Many centuries
later, in 1564, a deposit of a black substance found to be very
useful for writing was discovered in Borrowdale, England.
This substance, originally called “black lead,” was shown in
1879 by Swedish chemist Carl Scheele to be a form of carbon
and was subsequently named graphite (after the Greek
graphein, meaning “to write”).
Originally, chunks of graphite from Borrowdale, called
marking stones, were used as writing instruments. Later,

D

Ionic and covalent bonds are the extreme
bond types.

sticks of graphite were used. Because graphite is brittle, the
sticks needed reinforcement. At ﬁrst they were wrapped in
string, which was unwound as the core wore down. Eventually, graphite rods were tied between two wooden slats or
inserted into hollowed-out wooden sticks to form the ﬁrst
crude pencils.
Although Borrowdale graphite was pure enough to use
directly, most graphite must be mixed with other materials
to be useful for writing instruments. In 1795, the French
chemist Nicolas-Jaques Conté invented a process in which
graphite is mixed with clay and water to produce pencil
“lead,” a recipe that is still used today. In modern pencil
manufacture, graphite and clay are mixed and crushed into
a ﬁne powder to which water is added. After the gray sludge

atoms. The potential energy of each electron is lowered because of the increased attractive forces in this area. When we say that a bond is formed between the hydrogen atoms,
we mean that the H2 molecule is more stable than two separated hydrogen atoms by a certain quantity of energy (the bond energy).
We can also think of a bond in terms of forces. The simultaneous attraction of each
electron by the protons generates a force that pulls the protons toward each other and that
just balances the proton–proton and electron–electron repulsive forces at the distance corresponding to the bond length.
The type of bonding we encounter in the hydrogen molecule and in many other molecules in which electrons are shared by nuclei is called covalent bonding.
So far we have considered two extreme types of bonding. In ionic bonding the participating atoms are so different that one or more electrons are transferred to form oppositely charged ions, which then attract each other. In covalent bonding two identical atoms
share electrons equally. The bonding results from the mutual attraction of the two nuclei
for the shared electrons. Between these extremes are intermediate cases in which the atoms
are not so different that electrons are completely transferred but are different enough that
unequal sharing results, forming what is called a polar covalent bond. An example of
this type of bond occurs in the hydrogen ﬂuoride (HF) molecule. When a sample of hydrogen ﬂuoride gas is placed in an electric ﬁeld, the molecules tend to orient themselves
as shown in Fig. 8.2, with the ﬂuoride end closest to the positive pole and the hydrogen
end closest to the negative pole. This result implies that the HF molecule has the following charge distribution:
H¬F
d d

Visualization: Polar Molecules

where ␦ (lowercase delta) is used to indicate a fractional charge. This same effect was
noted in Chapter 4, where many of water’s unusual properties were attributed to the polar O¬H bonds in the H2O molecule.
The most logical explanation for the development of the partial positive and negative charges on the atoms (bond polarity) in such molecules as HF and H2O is that the

8.2 Electronegativity

is blended for several days, it is dried, ground up again, and
mixed with more water to give a gray paste. The paste is
extruded through a metal tube to form thin rods, which are
then cut into pencil-length pieces called “leads.” These leads
are heated in an oven to 1000C until they are smooth and
hard. The ratio of clay to graphite is adjusted to vary the
hardness of the lead—-the more clay in the mix, the harder
the lead and the lighter the line it makes.
Pencils are made from a slat of wood with several
grooves cut in it to hold the leads. A similar grooved slat is
then placed on top and glued to form a “sandwich” from
which individual pencils are cut, sanded smooth, and
painted. Although many types of wood have been used over
the years to make pencils, the current favorite is incense
cedar from the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California.
Modern pencils are simple but amazing instruments.
The average pencil can write approximately 45,000 words,

333

which is equivalent to a line 35 miles long. The graphite in
a pencil is easily transferred to paper because graphite contains layers of carbon atoms bound together in a “chickenwire” structure. Although the bonding within each layer is
very strong, the bonding between layers is weak, giving
graphite its slippery, soft nature. In this way, graphite is
much different from diamond, the other common elemental
form of carbon. In diamond the carbon atoms are bound
tightly in all three dimensions, making it extremely hard—
the hardest natural substance.
Pencils are very useful—-especially for doing chemistry
problems—-because we can erase our mistakes. Most pencils
used in the United States have erasers (ﬁrst attached to pencils in 1858), although most European pencils do not. Laid
end-to end, the number of pencils made in the United States
each year would circle the earth about 15 times. Pencils illustrate how useful a simple substance like graphite can be.

electrons in the bonds are not shared equally. For example, we can account for the polarity of the HF molecule by assuming that the ﬂuorine atom has a stronger attraction
for the shared electrons than the hydrogen atom. Likewise, in the H2O molecule the oxygen atom appears to attract the shared electrons more strongly than the hydrogen atoms
do. Because bond polarity has important chemical implications, we ﬁnd it useful to quantify the ability of an atom to attract shared electrons. In the next section we show how
this is done.

8.2

Electronegativity

The different afﬁnities of atoms for the electrons in a bond are described by a property
called electronegativity: the ability of an atom in a molecule to attract shared electrons
to itself.
–
δ–

+

δ+
δ–

δ+

FIGURE 8.2
The effect of an electric ﬁeld on hydrogen
ﬂuoride molecules. (a) When no electric
ﬁeld is present, the molecules are randomly
oriented. (b) When the ﬁeld is turned on,
the molecules tend to line up with their
negative ends toward the positive pole and
their positive ends toward the negative
pole.

(a)
(b)
H

F

334

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
Increasing electronegativity
H

Decreasing electronegativity

2.1

Li
1.0

B

Be

2.0

1.5

Na

Mg

0.9

1.2

P

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

F

O

N

C

S

Al

Si

1.5

1.8

2.1

2.5

Se

Cl
3.0

Br

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Ge

As

1.5

1.6

1.6

1.5

1.8

1.9

1.9

1.9

Ga

1.6

1.6

1.8

2.0

Nb

Mo

Tc

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Sb

Te

2.2

1.9

Sn

1.9

2.2

In

1.8

2.2

Cd

1.6

1.7

1.7

1.8

1.9

2.1

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au

2.2

Pb

Bi

At

2.2

Tl

Po

2.2

Hg

1.9

2.4

1.7

1.9

1.8

1.9

1.9

2.0

2.2

K

Ca

0.8

1.0

1.3

Rb

Sr

Y

Zr

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

Cs

Ba

La–Lu

Hf

Ta

0.9

1.0–1.2

1.3

1.5

0.7

Fr

Ra

Ac

Th

Pa

U

Np–No

1.1

1.3

1.4

1.4

0.7

0.9

1.4–1.3

2.4

2.8

I
2.5

FIGURE 8.3
The Pauling electronegativity values. Electronegativity generally increases across a period and decreases down a group.

The most widely accepted method for determining values of electronegativity is that
of Linus Pauling (1901–1995), an American scientist who won the Nobel Prizes for both
chemistry and peace. To understand Pauling’s model, consider a hypothetical molecule
HX. The relative electronegativities of the H and X atoms are determined by comparing
the measured HOX bond energy with the “expected” HOX bond energy, which is an average of the HOH and XOX bond energies:
Expected H¬X bond energy 

H¬H bond energy  X¬X bond energy
2

The difference ( ) between the actual (measured) and expected bond energies is
¢  1H¬X2 act  1H¬X2 exp
If H and X have identical electronegativities, (HOX)act and (HOX)exp are the same, and
is 0. On the other hand, if X has a greater electronegativity than H, the shared electron(s) will tend to be closer to the X atom. The molecule will be polar, with the following charge distribution:
H¬X
d d

Note that this bond can be viewed as having an ionic as well as a covalent component. The attraction between the partially (and oppositely) charged H and X atoms will
lead to a greater bond strength. Thus (HOX)act will be larger than (HOX)exp. The greater
is the difference in the electronegativities of the atoms, the greater is the ionic component
of the bond and the greater is the value of . Thus the relative electronegativities of H
and X can be assigned from the values.
Electronegativity values have been determined by this process for virtually all the elements; the results are given in Fig. 8.3. Note that electronegativity generally increases
going from left to right across a period and decreases going down a group for the representative elements. The range of electronegativity values is from 4.0 for ﬂuorine to 0.7
for cesium.
The relationship between electronegativity and bond type is shown in Table 8.1. For
identical atoms (an electronegativity difference of zero), the electrons in the bond are shared
equally, and no polarity develops. When two atoms with very different electronegativities

8.3 Bond Polarity and Dipole Moments

TABLE 8.1

335

The Relationship Between Electronegativity and Bond Type

Electronegativity Difference
in the Bonding Atoms

Bond
Type

Zero

Covalent

⎯⎯⎯→

⎯⎯⎯→

Intermediate

Polar covalent

⎯⎯⎯→

⎯⎯⎯→

Covalent
character

Large

Ionic

Ionic
character

interact, electron transfer can occur to form the ions that make up an ionic substance.
Intermediate cases give polar covalent bonds with unequal electron sharing.

Sample Exercise 8.1

Relative Bond Polarities
Order the following bonds according to polarity: HOH, OOH, ClOH, SOH, and FOH.
Solution
The polarity of the bond increases as the difference in electronegativity increases. From
the electronegativity values in Fig. 8.3, the following variation in bond polarity is expected
(the electronegativity value appears in parentheses below each element):
H¬H 6 S¬H 6 Cl¬H 6 O¬H 6 F¬H

12.12 12.12

12.52 12.12

13.02 12.12

13.52 12.12

14.02 12.12

Electronegativity
difference

See Exercises 8.31 and 8.32.

8.3

Bond Polarity and Dipole Moments

We have seen that when hydrogen ﬂuoride is placed in an electric ﬁeld, the molecules
have a preferential orientation (see Fig. 8.2). This follows from the charge distribution in
the HF molecule, which has a positive end and a negative end. A molecule such as HF
that has a center of positive charge and a center of negative charge is said to be dipolar,
or to have a dipole moment. The dipolar character of a molecule is often represented by
an arrow pointing to the negative charge center with the tail of the arrow indicating the
positive center of charge:

H

δ+

F

δ−

336

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

H

F

FIGURE 8.4
An electrostatic potential map of HF. Red
indicates the most electron-rich area (the
ﬂuorine atom) and blue indicates the most
electron-poor region (the hydrogen atom).

Another way to represent the charge distribution in HF is by an electrostatic potential diagram (see Fig. 8.4). For this representation the colors of visible light are used to
show the variation in charge distribution. Red indicates the most electron-rich region of
the molecule and blue indicates the most electron-poor region.
Of course, any diatomic (two-atom) molecule that has a polar bond also will show a
molecular dipole moment. Polyatomic molecules also can exhibit dipolar behavior. For
example, because the oxygen atom in the water molecule has a greater electronegativity
than the hydrogen atoms, the molecular charge distribution is that shown in Fig. 8.5(a).
Because of this charge distribution, the water molecule behaves in an electric ﬁeld as if
it had two centers of charge—one positive and one negative—as shown in Fig. 8.5(b). The
water molecule has a dipole moment. The same type of behavior is observed for the NH3
molecule (Fig. 8.6). Some molecules have polar bonds but do not have a dipole moment.
This occurs when the individual bond polarities are arranged in such a way that they cancel each other out. An example is the CO2 molecule, which is a linear molecule that has
the charge distribution shown in Fig. 8.7. In this case the opposing bond polarities cancel out, and the carbon dioxide molecule does not have a dipole moment. There is no preferential way for this molecule to line up in an electric ﬁeld. (Try to ﬁnd a preferred orientation to make sure you understand this concept.)
There are many cases besides that of carbon dioxide where the bond polarities oppose and exactly cancel each other. Some common types of molecules with polar bonds
but no dipole moment are shown in Table 8.2.

–

δ+

H

H
O

FIGURE 8.5
(a) The charge distribution in the water
molecule. (b) The water molecule in an
electric ﬁeld. (c) The electrostatic potential
diagram of the water molecule.

FIGURE 8.6
(a) The structure and charge distribution of
the ammonia molecule. The polarity of the
NOH bonds occurs because nitrogen has a
greater electronegativity than hydrogen.
(b) The dipole moment of the ammonia
molecule oriented in an electric ﬁeld.
(c) The electrostatic potential diagram for
ammonia.

δ+

∆+

2δ–

∆–

O

H

H

(a)

(b)

(c)

+

∆–

3δ–
N
H
+
δ H
δ+

H
δ+

∆+
–

(a)

δ–

FIGURE 8.7
(a) The carbon dioxide molecule. (b) The
opposed bond polarities cancel out, and
the carbon dioxide molecule has no dipole
moment. (c) The electrostatic potential
diagram for carbon dioxide.

+

O

(a)

(b)

2δ+
C

(c)

δ–
O

(b)

(c)

8.3 Bond Polarity and Dipole Moments

TABLE 8.2

337

Types of Molecules with Polar Bonds but No Resulting Dipole Moment
Cancellation
of Polar Bonds

Type
Linear molecules with
two identical bonds

BOAOB

Example

Ball-and-Stick Model

CO2

B

Planar molecules
with three identical
bonds 120 degrees apart

SO3

A
B

120

B

B
Tetrahedral molecules
with four identical
bonds 109.5 degrees apart

CCl4

A

B

B
B

Sample Exercise 8.2

Bond Polarity and Dipole Moment
For each of the following molecules, show the direction of the bond polarities and indicate which ones have a dipole moment: HCl, Cl2, SO3 (a planar molecule with the oxygen atoms spaced evenly around the central sulfur atom), CH4 [tetrahedral (see Table 8.2)
with the carbon atom at the center], and H2S (V-shaped with the sulfur atom at the point).
Solution
The HCl molecule: In Fig. 8.3, we see that the electronegativity of chlorine (3.0) is greater
than that of hydrogen (2.1). Thus the chlorine will be partially negative, and the hydrogen will be partially positive. The HCl molecule has a dipole moment:

Cl

H

H

Cl

δ+

δ–

The Cl2 molecule: The two chlorine atoms share the electrons equally. No bond polarity occurs, and the Cl2 molecule has no dipole moment.
The SO3 molecule: The electronegativity of oxygen (3.5) is greater than that of sulfur (2.5). This means that each oxygen will have a partial negative charge, and the sulfur
will have a partial positive charge:

O

S
O

O

δ–

O
S
O

δ–

3δ +
O

δ–

338

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

The presence of polar bonds does not
always yield a polar molecule.

The bond polarities arranged symmetrically as shown cancel, and the molecule has no dipole moment. This molecule is the second type shown in Table 8.2.
The CH4 molecule: Carbon has a slightly higher electronegativity (2.5) than does hydrogen (2.1). This leads to small partial positive charges on the hydrogen atoms and a
small partial negative charge on the carbon:

H δ+
4δ –
C
H
H δ+
δ+ H
δ+

H
H

C

H

H

This case is similar to the third type in Table 8.2, and the bond polarities cancel. The molecule has no dipole moment.
The H2S molecule: Since the electronegativity of sulfur (2.5) is slightly greater than
that of hydrogen (2.1), the sulfur will have a partial negative charge, and the hydrogen
atoms will have a partial positive charge, which can be represented as

δ+ H
H

H δ+
S

H

2δ –

S

This case is analogous to the water molecule, and the polar bonds result in a dipole moment oriented as shown:

H

H
S

See Exercise 8.114.

8.4
Atoms in stable compounds usually have
a noble gas electron conﬁguration.

Ions: Electron Conﬁgurations and Sizes

The description of the electron arrangements in atoms that emerged from the quantum
mechanical model has helped a great deal in our understanding of what constitutes a stable compound. In virtually every case the atoms in a stable compound have a noble gas
arrangement of electrons. Nonmetallic elements achieve a noble gas electron conﬁguration either by sharing electrons with other nonmetals to form covalent bonds or by taking electrons from metals to form ions. In the second case, the nonmetals form anions,
and the metals form cations. The generalizations that apply to electron conﬁgurations in
stable compounds are as follows:
• When two nonmetals react to form a covalent bond, they share electrons in a way that
completes the valence electron conﬁgurations of both atoms. That is, both nonmetals
attain noble gas electron conﬁgurations.

8.4 Ions: Electron Conﬁgurations and Sizes

339

• When a nonmetal and a representative-group metal react to form a binary ionic compound, the ions form so that the valence electron conﬁguration of the nonmetal achieves
the electron conﬁguration of the next noble gas atom and the valence orbitals of the
metal are emptied. In this way both ions achieve noble gas electron conﬁgurations.
These generalizations apply to the vast majority of compounds and are important to
remember. We will deal with covalent bonds more thoroughly later, but now we will consider what implications these rules hold for ionic compounds.

In the solid state of an ionic compound
the ions are relatively close together, and
many ions are simultaneously interacting:

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

repulsion
attraction

In the gas phase of an ionic substance
the ions would be relatively far apart and
would not contain large groups of ions:

-

+
+

-

-

+

Predicting Formulas of Ionic Compounds
At the beginning of this discussion it should be emphasized that when chemists use the
term ionic compound, they are usually referring to the solid state of that compound. In
the solid state the ions are close together. That is, solid ionic compounds contain a large
Q
collection of positive and negative ions packed together in a way that minimizes the
Q
Q
and
repulsions and maximizes the
attractions. This situation stands in
contrast to the gas phase of an ionic substance, where the ions are quite far apart on average. In the gas phase, a pair of ions may get close enough to interact, but large collections of ions do not exist. Thus, when we speak in this text of the stability of an ionic
compound, we are referring to the solid state, where the large attractive forces present
among oppositely charged ions tend to stabilize (favor the formation of) the ions. For example, as we mentioned in the preceding chapter, the O2 ion is not stable as an isolated,
gas-phase species but, of course, is very stable in many solid ionic compounds. That is,
MgO(s), which contains Mg2 and O2 ions, is very stable, but the isolated, gas-phase
ion pair Mg2 . . O2 is not energetically favorable in comparison with the separate neutral
gaseous atoms. Thus you should keep in mind that in this section, and in most other cases
where we are describing the nature of ionic compounds, the discussion usually refers to
the solid state, where many ions are simultaneously interacting.
To illustrate the principles of electron conﬁgurations in stable, solid ionic compounds,
we will consider the formation of an ionic compound from calcium and oxygen. We can
predict what compound will form by considering the valence electron conﬁgurations of
the two atoms:

B B

B E

E E

Ca: 3Ar44s2
O:
3He42s22p4
From Fig. 8.3 we see that the electronegativity of oxygen (3.5) is much greater than that
of calcium (1.0). Because of this large difference, electrons will be transferred from calcium to oxygen to form oxygen anions and calcium cations in the compound. How many
electrons are transferred? We can base our prediction on the observation that noble gas
conﬁgurations are generally the most stable. Note that oxygen needs two electrons to ﬁll
its 2s and 2p valence orbitals and to achieve the conﬁguration of neon (1s22s22p6). And
by losing two electrons, calcium can achieve the conﬁguration of argon. Two electrons
are therefore transferred:
Ca  O ¡ Ca2  O2
哭

2e

Visualization: Formation of
Ionic Compounds

To predict the formula of the ionic compound, we simply recognize that chemical
compounds are always electrically neutral—they have the same quantities of positive and
negative charges. In this case we have equal numbers of Ca2 and O2 ions, and the empirical formula of the compound is CaO.
The same principles can be applied to many other cases. For example, consider the
compound formed between aluminum and oxygen. Because aluminum has the conﬁguration [Ne]3s23p1, it loses three electrons to form the Al3 ion and thus achieves the neon

340

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

A bauxite mine. Bauxite contains Al2O3,
the main source of aluminum.

conﬁguration. Therefore, the Al3 and O2 ions form in this case. Since the compound
must be electrically neutral, there must be three O2 ions for every two Al3 ions, and the
compound has the empirical formula Al2O3.
Table 8.3 shows common elements that form ions with noble gas electron conﬁgurations in ionic compounds. In losing electrons to form cations, metals in Group 1A lose
one electron, those in Group 2A lose two electrons, and those in Group 3A lose three
electrons. In gaining electrons to form anions, nonmetals in Group 7A (the halogens) gain
one electron, and those in Group 6A gain two electrons. Hydrogen typically behaves as
a nonmetal and can gain one electron to form the hydride ion (H), which has the electron conﬁguration of helium.
There are some important exceptions to the rules discussed here. For example, tin
forms both Sn2 and Sn4 ions, and lead forms both Pb2 and Pb4 ions. Also, bismuth
forms Bi3 and Bi5 ions, and thallium forms Tl and Tl3 ions. There are no simple
explanations for the behavior of these ions. For now, just note them as exceptions to the
very useful rule that ions generally adopt noble gas electron conﬁgurations in ionic
compounds. Our discussion here refers to representative metals. The transition metals
exhibit more complicated behavior, forming a variety of ions that will be considered in
Chapter 21.

Sizes of Ions
Ion size plays an important role in determining the structure and stability of ionic solids,
the properties of ions in aqueous solution, and the biologic effects of ions. As with atoms,
it is impossible to deﬁne precisely the sizes of ions. Most often, ionic radii are determined

TABLE 8.3

Common Ions with Noble Gas Conﬁgurations in Ionic Compounds

Group 1A

Group 2A

H, Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs

Be2
Mg2
Ca2
Sr2
Ba2

Group 3A

Group 6A

Group 7A

Al3

O2
S2
Se2
Te2

F
Cl
Br
I

Electron
Conﬁguration
[He]
[Ne]
[Ar]
[Kr]
[Xe]

8.4 Ions: Electron Conﬁgurations and Sizes

Visualization: Ionic Radii

For isoelectronic ions, size decreases as
Z increases.

from the measured distances between ion centers in ionic compounds. This method, of
course, involves an assumption about how the distance should be divided up between the
two ions. Thus you will note considerable disagreement among ionic sizes given in various sources. Here we are mainly interested in trends and will be less concerned with absolute ion sizes.
Various factors inﬂuence ionic size. We will ﬁrst consider the relative sizes of an ion
and its parent atom. Since a positive ion is formed by removing one or more electrons
from a neutral atom, the resulting cation is smaller than its parent atom. The opposite is
true for negative ions; the addition of electrons to a neutral atom produces an anion signiﬁcantly larger than its parent atom.
It is also important to know how the sizes of ions vary depending on the positions of
the parent elements in the periodic table. Figure 8.8 shows the sizes of the most important ions (each with a noble gas conﬁguration) and their position in the periodic table.
Note that ion size increases down a group. The changes that occur horizontally are complicated because of the change from predominantly metals on the left-hand side of the periodic table to nonmetals on the right-hand side. A given period thus contains both elements
that give up electrons to form cations and ones that accept electrons to form anions.
One trend worth noting involves the relative sizes of a set of isoelectronic ions—
ions containing the same number of electrons. Consider the ions O2, F, Na, Mg2,
and Al3. Each of these ions has the neon electron conﬁguration. How do the sizes of
these ions vary? In general, there are two important facts to consider in predicting the
relative sizes of ions: the number of electrons and the number of protons. Since these
ions are isoelectronic, the number of electrons is 10 in each case. Electron repulsions
therefore should be about the same in all cases. However, the number of protons increases
from 8 to 13 as we go from the O2 ion to the Al3 ion. Thus, in going from O2 to Al3,
the 10 electrons experience a greater attraction as the positive charge on the nucleus increases. This causes the ions to become smaller. You can conﬁrm this by looking at Fig.
8.8. In general, for a series of isoelectronic ions, the size decreases as the nuclear charge
Z increases.

Li+

Be2+
O2 –

60

31

Na+

Mg2+

140

95
K+

65
Ca2+

133

99

Rb+

Sr2+

113

136

Cl–

50
184

181

Se2–

Br–

198

195

Ga3+

62
In3+

Sn4+

Sb5+
Te2–

148

F–

Al3+
S2–

FIGURE 8.8
Sizes of ions related to positions of the
elements on the periodic table. Note that
size generally increases down a group. Also
note that in a series of isoelectronic ions,
size decreases with increasing atomic
number. The ionic radii are given in units
of picometers.

341

81

71

I–

62
221

216

342

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

Sample Exercise 8.3

Relative Ion Size I
Arrange the ions Se2, Br, Rb, and Sr2 in order of decreasing size.
Solution
This is an isoelectronic series of ions with the krypton electron conﬁguration. Since these
ions all have the same number of electrons, their sizes will depend on the nuclear charge.
The Z values are 34 for Se2, 35 for Br, 37 for Rb, and 38 for Sr2. Since the nuclear
charge is greatest for Sr2, it is the smallest of these ions. The Se2 ion is largest:
Se2 7 Br 7 Rb 7 Sr2
c
Largest

c
Smallest

See Exercises 8.37 and 8.38.
Sample Exercise 8.4

Relative Ion Size II
Choose the largest ion in each of the following groups.
a. Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs
b. Ba2, Cs, I, Te2
Solution
a. The ions are all from Group 1A elements. Since size increases down a group (the ion
with the greatest number of electrons is largest), Cs is the largest ion.
b. This is an isoelectronic series of ions, all of which have the xenon electron conﬁguration. The ion with the smallest nuclear charge is largest:
Te2 7 I 7 Cs 7 Ba2
Z  52 Z  53 Z  55 Z  56
See Exercises 8.39 and 8.40.

8.5

Energy Effects in Binary Ionic Compounds

In this section we will introduce the factors that inﬂuence the stability and the structures
of solid binary ionic compounds. We know that metals and nonmetals react by transferring electrons to form cations and anions that are mutually attractive. The resulting ionic
solid forms because the aggregated oppositely charged ions have a lower energy than the
original elements. Just how strongly the ions attract each other in the solid state is indicated by the lattice energy—the change in energy that takes place when separated gaseous
ions are packed together to form an ionic solid:
M 1g2  X 1g2 ¡ MX1s2
The structures of ionic solids will be
discussed in detail in Chapter 10.

The lattice energy is often deﬁned as the energy released when an ionic solid forms from
its ions. However, in this book the sign of an energy term is always determined from the
system’s point of view: negative if the process is exothermic, positive if endothermic.
Thus, using this convention, the lattice energy has a negative sign.
We can illustrate the energy changes involved in the formation of an ionic solid by
considering the formation of solid lithium ﬂuoride from its elements:
Li1s2  12F2 1g2 ¡ LiF1s2
To see the energy terms associated with this process, we take advantage of the fact that
energy is a state function and break this reaction into steps, the sum of which gives the
overall reaction.

8.5 Energy Effects in Binary Ionic Compounds

343

➥ 1 Sublimation of solid lithium. Sublimation involves taking a substance from the
solid state to the gaseous state:
Li1s2 ¡ Li1g2
The enthalpy of sublimation for Li(s) is 161 kJ/mol.

➥2

Ionization of lithium atoms to form Li ions in the gas phase:
Li1g2 ¡ Li 1g2  e

This process corresponds to the ﬁrst ionization energy for lithium, which is 520 kJ/mol.

➥

3 Dissociation of ﬂuorine molecules. We need to form a mole of ﬂuorine atoms by
breaking the F—F bonds in a half mole of F2 molecules:
1
2 F2 1g2

¡ F1g2

The energy required to break this bond is 154 kJ/mol. In this case we are breaking the
bonds in a half mole of ﬂuorine, so the energy required for this step is (154 kJ)2, or 77 kJ.
Lithium ﬂuoride.

➥4

Formation of F ions from ﬂuorine atoms in the gas phase:
F1g2  e ¡ F 1g2

The energy change for this process corresponds to the electron afﬁnity of ﬂuorine, which
is 328 kJ/mol.

➥5

Formation of solid lithium ﬂuoride from the gaseous Li and F ions:
Li 1g2  F 1g2 ¡ LiF1s2

This corresponds to the lattice energy for LiF, which is 1047 kJ/mol.
Since the sum of these ﬁve processes yields the desired overall reaction, the sum of
the individual energy changes gives the overall energy change:
Process

Energy Change (kJ)

Li1s2 S Li1g2

Li1g2 S Li 1g2  e


1
2F2 1g2


S F1g2

F1g2  e S F 1g2


Li 1g2  F 1g2 S LiF1s2
Overall:

In doing this calculation, we have ignored
the small difference between Hsub and
Esub.

Li1s2  12 F2 1g2 S LiF1s2

161


520
77
328
1047
617 kJ (per mole of LiF)

This process is summarized by the energy diagram in Fig. 8.9. Note that the formation of solid lithium ﬂuoride from its elements is highly exothermic, mainly because of
the very large negative lattice energy. A great deal of energy is released when the ions
combine to form the solid. In fact, note that the energy released when an electron is added
to a ﬂuorine atom to form the F ion (328 kJ/mol) is not enough to remove an electron
from lithium (520 kJ/mol). That is, when a metallic lithium atom reacts with a nonmetallic
ﬂuorine atom to form separated ions,
Li1g2  F1g2 ¡ Li 1g2  F 1g2

the process is endothermic and thus unfavorable. Clearly, then, the main impetus for the
formation of an ionic compound rather than a covalent compound results from the strong
mutual attractions among the Li and F ions in the solid. The lattice energy is the dominant energy term.

344

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
Li+(g) + F(g)
1
Li+(g) + 2 F2(g)

77 kJ(3)
–328 kJ(4)

Visualization: Born–Haber
Cycle for NaCl(s)

Li+(g) + F –(g)

520 kJ(2)
1
Li(g) + 2 F2(g)

E

161 kJ(1)

Li(s) + 12 F2(g)
–1047 kJ(5)

FIGURE 8.9
The energy changes involved in the formation of solid lithium ﬂuoride from its elements. The numbers in parentheses refer to
the reaction steps discussed in the text.

–617 kJ

Overall
change
LiF(s)

The structure of solid lithium ﬂuoride is represented in Fig. 8.10. Note the alternating arrangement of the Li and F ions. Also note that each Li is surrounded by six
F ions, and each F ion is surrounded by six Li ions. This structure can be rationalized
by assuming that the ions behave as hard spheres that pack together in a way that both
maximizes the attractions among the oppositely charged ions and minimizes the repulsions among the identically charged ions.
All the binary ionic compounds formed by an alkali metal and a halogen have the
structure shown in Fig. 8.10, except for the cesium salts. The arrangement of ions shown
in Fig. 8.10 is often called the sodium chloride structure, after the most common substance that possesses it.

Lattice Energy Calculations
(a)

In discussing the energetics of the formation of solid lithium ﬂuoride, we emphasized the
importance of lattice energy in contributing to the stability of the ionic solid. Lattice energy can be represented by a modiﬁed form of Coulomb’s law:
Lattice energy  ka

(b)

FIGURE 8.10
The structure of lithium ﬂuoride. (a) Represented by ball-and-stick model. Note that
each Li ion is surrounded by six F ions,
and each F ion is surrounded by six Li
ions. (b) Represented with the ions shown
as spheres. The structure is determined by
packing the spherical ions in a way that
both maximizes the ionic attractions and
minimizes the ionic repulsions.

Q1Q2
b
r

where k is a proportionality constant that depends on the structure of the solid and the
electron conﬁgurations of the ions, Q1 and Q2 are the charges on the ions, and r is the
shortest distance between the centers of the cations and anions. Note that the lattice energy has a negative sign when Q1 and Q2 have opposite signs. This result is expected,
since bringing cations and anions together is an exothermic process. Also note that the
process becomes more exothermic as the ionic charges increase and as the distances between the ions in the solid decrease.
The importance of the charges in ionic solids can be illustrated by comparing the energies involved in the formation of NaF(s) and MgO(s). These solids contain the isoelectronic ions Na, F, Mg2, and O2. The energy diagram for the formation of the two
solids is given in Fig. 8.11. Note several important features:
The energy released when the gaseous Mg2 and O2 ions combine to form solid
MgO is much greater (more than four times greater) than that released when the
gaseous Na and F ions combine to form solid NaF.
The energy required to remove two electrons from the magnesium atom (735 kJ/mol for
the ﬁrst and 1445 kJ/mol for the second, yielding a total of 2180 kJ/mol) is much greater
than the energy required to remove one electron from a sodium atom (495 kJ/mol).

8.5 Energy Effects in Binary Ionic Compounds

345

Mg2+(g) + O2–(g)

737

Electron affinity

Mg2+(g) + O(g)
247
1
Mg2+(g) + 2 O2(g)

–3916

Lattice
energy

E

2180

Ionization energy

Na+(g) +

1
2

Na+(g) + F(g)
F2(g)

77
–328

Electron
affinity

–923

Lattice
energy

Na+(g) + F –(g)
495
Mg(g) +

1
2

O2(g)

Mg(s) +

1
2

O2(g)

–602

MgO(s)

150

Overall
energy
change

109

Ionization
energy
Na(g) +

1
2

F2(g)

Na(s) +

1
2

F2(g)

–570

NaF(s)

FIGURE 8.11
Comparison of the energy changes involved in the formation of solid sodium ﬂuoride and solid magnesium oxide. Note the large
lattice energy for magnesium oxide (where doubly charged ions are combining) compared with that for sodium ﬂuoride (where
singly charged ions are combining).

Energy (737 kJ/mol) is required to add two electrons to the oxygen atom in the gas
phase. Addition of the ﬁrst electron is exothermic (141 kJ/mol), but addition of the
second electron is quite endothermic (878 kJ/mol). This latter energy must be obtained
indirectly, since the O2(g) ion is not stable.
In view of the facts that twice as much energy is required to remove the second electron from magnesium as to remove the ﬁrst and that addition of an electron to the gaseous
O ion is quite endothermic, it seems puzzling that magnesium oxide contains Mg2 and
O2 ions rather than Mg and O ions. The answer lies in the lattice energy. Note that the
lattice energy for combining gaseous Mg2 and O2 ions to form MgO(s) is 3000 kJ/mol

346

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

Since the equation for lattice energy contains the product Q1Q2, the lattice energy
for a solid with 2 and 2 ions should
be four times that for a solid with 1
and 1 ions. That is,
122 122

112 112

4

For MgO and NaF, the observed ratio of
lattice energies (see Fig. 8.11) is
3916 kJ
 4.24
923 kJ

more negative than that for combining gaseous Na and F ions to form NaF(s). Thus the
energy released in forming a solid containing Mg2 and O2 ions rather than Mg and
O ions more than compensates for the energies required for the processes that produce
the Mg2 and O2 ions.
If there is so much lattice energy to be gained in going from singly charged to
doubly charged ions in the case of magnesium oxide, why then does solid sodium
ﬂuoride contain Na and F ions rather than Na2 and F2 ions? We can answer this
question by recognizing that both Na and F ions have the neon electron conﬁguration. Removal of an electron from Na requires an extremely large quantity of energy
(4560 kJ/mol) because a 2p electron must be removed. Conversely, the addition of an
electron to F would require use of the relatively high-energy 3s orbital, which is also
an unfavorable process. Thus we can say that for sodium ﬂuoride the extra energy
required to form the doubly charged ions is greater than the gain in lattice energy that
would result.
This discussion of the energies involved in the formation of solid ionic compounds
illustrates that a variety of factors operate to determine the composition and structure of
these compounds. The most important of these factors involve the balancing of the energies required to form highly charged ions and the energy released when highly charged
ions combine to form the solid.

8.6

F

Partial Ionic Character of Covalent Bonds

Recall that when atoms with different electronegativities react to form molecules, the electrons are not shared equally. The possible result is a polar covalent bond or, in the case
of a large electronegativity difference, a complete transfer of one or more electrons to
form ions. The cases are summarized in Fig. 8.12.
How well can we tell the difference between an ionic bond and a polar covalent bond?
The only honest answer to this question is that there are probably no totally ionic bonds
between discrete pairs of atoms. The evidence for this statement comes from calculations
of the percent ionic character for the bonds of various binary compounds in the gas phase.
These calculations are based on comparisons of the measured dipole moments for molecules of the type X—Y with the calculated dipole moments for the completely ionic case,
XY. The percent ionic character of a bond can be deﬁned as

F

(a)

Percent ionic character of a bond  a
H

F

(b)

+

–

(c)

FIGURE 8.12
The three possible types of bonds: (a) a
covalent bond formed between identical F
atoms; (b) the polar covalent bond of HF,
with both ionic and covalent components;
and (c) an ionic bond with no electron
sharing.

measured dipole moment of X¬Y
b  100%
calculated dipole moment of XY

Application of this deﬁnition to various compounds (in the gas phase) gives the results
shown in Fig. 8.13, where percent ionic character is plotted versus the difference in the
electronegativity values of X and Y. Note from this plot that ionic character increases with
electronegativity difference, as expected. However, none of the bonds reaches 100% ionic
character, even though compounds with the maximum possible electronegativity differences are considered. Thus, according to this deﬁnition, no individual bonds are completely ionic. This conclusion is in contrast to the usual classiﬁcation of many of these
compounds (as ionic solids). All the compounds shown in Fig. 8.13 with more than 50%
ionic character are normally considered to be ionic solids. Recall, however, the results in
Fig. 8.13 are for the gas phase, where individual XY molecules exist. These results cannot necessarily be assumed to apply to the solid state, where the existence of ions is favored by the multiple ion interactions.
Another complication in identifying ionic compounds is that many substances
contain polyatomic ions. For example, NH4Cl contains NH4 and Cl ions, and Na2SO4
contains Na and SO42 ions. The ammonium and sulfate ions are held together
by covalent bonds. Thus, calling NH4Cl and Na2SO4 ionic compounds is somewhat
ambiguous.

8.7 The Covalent Chemical Bond: A Model

347

FIGURE 8.13
The relationship between the ionic character of a covalent bond and the electronegativity difference of the bonded atoms. Note
that the compounds with ionic character
greater than 50% are normally considered
to be ionic compounds.

Percent ionic character

100
LiF

KCl
CsI KBr NaCl
Kl
CsCl
LiCl

75

LiI

50

KF
CsF

LiBr
HF

25

0

IBr
0

HI

HCl
HBr
ICl
1

2
Electronegativity difference

3

We will avoid these problems by adopting an operational deﬁnition of ionic compounds: Any compound that conducts an electric current when melted will be classiﬁed
as ionic.

8.7

A tetrahedron has four equal triangular
faces.

The Covalent Chemical Bond: A Model

Before we develop speciﬁc models for covalent chemical bonding, it will be helpful to
summarize some of the concepts introduced in this chapter.
What is a chemical bond? Chemical bonds can be viewed as forces that cause a group
of atoms to behave as a unit.
Why do chemical bonds occur? There is no principle of nature that states that bonds
are favored or disfavored. Bonds are neither inherently “good” nor inherently “bad” as far
as nature is concerned; bonds result from the tendency of a system to seek its lowest possible energy. From a simplistic point of view, bonds occur when collections of atoms are
more stable (lower in energy) than the separate atoms. For example, approximately 1652 kJ
of energy is required to break a mole of methane (CH4) molecules into separate C and H
atoms. Or, taking the opposite view, 1652 kJ of energy is released when 1 mole of methane
is formed from 1 mole of gaseous C atoms and 4 moles of gaseous H atoms. Thus we
can say that 1 mole of CH4 molecules in the gas phase is 1652 kJ lower in energy than
1 mole of carbon atoms plus 4 moles of hydrogen atoms. Methane is therefore a stable
molecule relative to its separated atoms.
We ﬁnd it useful to interpret molecular stability in terms of a model called a chemical bond. To understand why this model was invented, let’s continue with methane, which
consists of four hydrogen atoms arranged at the corners of a tetrahedron around a carbon
atom:
H
C

H

H

H

Given this structure, it is natural to envision four individual COH interactions (we call
them bonds). The energy of stabilization of CH4 is divided equally among the four bonds
to give an average COH bond energy per mole of COH bonds:
1652 kJ/mol
 413 kJ/mol
4

348

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
Next, consider methyl chloride, which consists of CH3Cl molecules having the
structure

Cl

C

H

H
H

Experiments have shown that approximately 1578 kJ of energy is required to break down
1 mole of gaseous CH3Cl molecules into gaseous carbon, chlorine, and hydrogen atoms.
The reverse process can be represented as
C1g2  Cl1g2  3H1g2 ¡ CH3Cl1g2  1578 kJ/mol

Molten NaCl conducts an electric current,
indicating the presence of mobile Na
and Cl ions.

A mole of gaseous methyl chloride is lower in energy by 1578 kJ than its separate gaseous
atoms. Thus a mole of methyl chloride is held together by 1578 kJ of energy. Again, it is
very useful to divide this energy into individual bonds. Methyl chloride can be visualized as containing one C—Cl bond and three C—H bonds. If we assume arbitrarily that
a C—H interaction represents the same quantity of energy in any situation (that is, that
the strength of a C—H bond is independent of its molecular environment), we can do the
following bookkeeping:
1 mol C¬Cl bonds plus 3 mol C¬ H bonds  1578 kJ
C¬Cl bond energy  31average C¬H bond energy2  1578 kJ
C¬Cl bond energy  31413 kJ/mol2  1578 kJ
C¬Cl bond energy  1578  1239  339 kJ/mol
These assumptions allow us to associate given quantities of energy with C—H and
C—Cl bonds.
It is important to note that the bond concept is a human invention. Bonds provide a
method for dividing up the energy evolved when a stable molecule is formed from its
component atoms. Thus in this context a bond represents a quantity of energy obtained
from the overall molecular energy of stabilization in a rather arbitrary way. This is not to
say that the concept of individual bonds is a bad idea. In fact, the modern concept of the
chemical bond, conceived by the American chemists G. N. Lewis and Linus Pauling, is
one of the most useful ideas chemists have ever developed.

Models: An Overview

Bonding is a model proposed to explain
molecular stability.

The framework of chemistry, like that of any science, consists of models—attempts to
explain how nature operates on the microscopic level based on experiences in the macroscopic world. To understand chemistry, one must understand its models and how they are
used. We will use the concept of bonding to reemphasize the important characteristics of
models, including their origin, structure, and uses.
Models originate from our observations of the properties of nature. For example, the
concept of bonds arose from the observations that most chemical processes involve collections of atoms and that chemical reactions involve rearrangements of the ways the atoms
are grouped. Therefore, to understand reactions, we must understand the forces that bind
atoms together.
In natural processes there is a tendency toward lower energy. Collections of atoms
therefore occur because the aggregated state has lower energy than the separated atoms.
Why? As we saw earlier in this chapter, the best explanations for the energy change involve

8.7 The Covalent Chemical Bond: A Model

349

atoms sharing electrons or atoms transferring electrons to become ions. In the case of electron sharing, we ﬁnd it convenient to assume that individual bonds occur between pairs
of atoms. Let’s explore the validity of this assumption and see how it is useful.
In a diatomic molecule such as H2, it is natural to assume that a bond exists between the
atoms, holding them together. It is also useful to assume that individual bonds are present in
polyatomic molecules such as CH4. Therefore, instead of thinking of CH4 as a unit with a stabilization energy of 1652 kJ per mole, we choose to think of CH4 as containing four C—H
bonds, each worth 413 kJ of energy per mole of bonds. Without this concept of individual
bonds in molecules, chemistry would be hopelessly complicated. There are millions of
different chemical compounds, and if each of these compounds had to be considered as an
entirely new entity, the task of understanding chemical behavior would be overwhelming.
The bonding model provides a framework to systematize chemical behavior by enabling us to think of molecules as collections of common fundamental components. For
example, a typical biomolecule, such as a protein, contains hundreds of atoms and might
seem discouragingly complex. However, if we think of a protein as constructed of individual bonds, COC, COH, CON, COO, NOH, and so on, it helps tremendously in
predicting and understanding the protein’s behavior. The essential idea is that we expect
a given bond to behave about the same in any molecular environment. Used in this way,
the model of the chemical bond has helped chemists to systematize the reactions of the
millions of existing compounds.
In addition to being useful, the bonding model is physically sensible. It makes sense
that atoms can form stable groups by sharing electrons; shared electrons give a lower energy state because they are simultaneously attracted by two nuclei.
Also, as we will see in the next section, bond energy data support the existence of
discrete bonds that are relatively independent of the molecular environment. It is very
important to remember, however, that the chemical bond is only a model. Although our
concept of discrete bonds in molecules agrees with many of our observations, some molecular properties require that we think of a molecule as a whole, with the electrons free
to move through the entire molecule. This is called delocalization of the electrons, a
concept that will be discussed more completely in the next chapter.

The concept of individual bonds makes it much easier to deal with complex molecules such as
DNA. A small segment of a DNA molecule is shown here.

350

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

Fundamental Properties of Models
䊉

Models are human inventions, always based on an incomplete understanding of how
nature works. A model does not equal reality.

䊉

Models are often wrong. This property derives from the ﬁrst property. Models are based
on speculation and are always oversimpliﬁcations.

䊉

Models tend to become more complicated as they age. As ﬂaws are discovered in our
models, we “patch” them and thus add more detail.

䊉

It is very important to understand the assumptions inherent in a particular model before you use it to interpret observations or to make predictions. Simple models usually involve very restrictive assumptions and can be expected to yield only qualitative
information. Asking for a sophisticated explanation from a simple model is like
expecting to get an accurate mass for a diamond using a bathroom scale.
For a model to be used effectively, we must understand its strengths and weaknesses and ask only appropriate questions. An illustration of this point is the simple
aufbau principle used to account for the electron conﬁgurations of the elements. Although this model correctly predicts the conﬁguration for most atoms, chromium and
copper, for example, do not agree with the predictions. Detailed studies show that the
conﬁgurations of chromium and copper result from complex electron interactions that
are not taken into account in the simple model. However, this does not mean that we
should discard the simple model that is so useful for most atoms. Instead, we must
apply it with caution and not expect it to be correct in every case.

䊉

When a model is wrong, we often learn much more than when it is right. If a model
makes a wrong prediction, it usually means we do not understand some fundamental characteristics of nature. We often learn by making mistakes. (Try to remember
this when you get back your next chemistry test.)

8.8

Covalent Bond Energies and Chemical Reactions

In this section we will consider the energies associated with various types of bonds and
see how the bonding concept is useful in dealing with the energies of chemical reactions.
One important consideration is to establish the sensitivity of a particular type of bond
to its molecular environment. For example, consider the stepwise decomposition of
methane:
Process

CH4(g)
CH3(g)
CH2(g)
CH(g)

S CH3(g)  H(g)
S CH2(g)  H(g)
S CH(g)  H(g)
S C(g)  H(g)

Energy Required (kJ/mol)

435
453
425
339
Total  1652
1652
Average 
 413
4

Although a COH bond is broken in each case, the energy required varies in a nonsystematic way. This example shows that the COH bond is somewhat sensitive to its
environment. We use the average of these individual bond dissociation energies even
though this quantity only approximates the energy associated with a COH bond in a particular molecule. The degree of sensitivity of a bond to its environment also can be seen

8.8 Covalent Bond Energies and Chemical Reactions

TABLE 8.4

351

Average Bond Energies (kJ/mol)
Single Bonds

HOH
HOF
HOCl
HOBr
HOI

432
565
427
363
295

COH
COC
CON
COO
COF
COCl
COBr
COI
COS

413
347
305
358
485
339
276
240
259

NOH
NON
NOF
NOCl
NOBr
NOO
OOH
OOO
OOF
OOCl
OOI

391
160
272
200
243
201
467
146
190
203
234

FOF
FOCl
FOBr
ClOCl
ClOBr
BrOBr

154
253
237
239
218
193

Multiple Bonds
IOI
IOCl
IOBr

149
208
175

SOH
SOF
SOCl
SOBr
SOS

347
327
253
218
266

SiOSi
SiOH
SiOC
SiOO

340
393
360
452

CPC
CqC
OPO
CPO*
CqO
NPO
NPN
NqN
CqN
CPN

614
839
495
745
1072
607
418
941
891
615

*CPO(CO2)  799

from experimental measurements of the energy required to break the COH bond in the
following molecules:
Molecule

Measured COH Bond
Energy (kJ/mol)

HCBr3
HCCl3
HCF3
C2H6

380
380
430
410

These data show that the COH bond strength varies signiﬁcantly with its environment,
but the concept of an average COH bond strength remains useful to chemists. The average values of bond energies for various types of bonds are listed in Table 8.4.
So far we have discussed bonds in which one pair of electrons is shared. This type of
bond is called a single bond. As we will see in more detail later, atoms sometimes share
two pairs of electrons, forming a double bond, or share three pairs of electrons, forming
a triple bond. The bond energies for these multiple bonds are also given in Table 8.4.
A relationship also exists between the number of shared electron pairs and the bond
length. As the number of shared electrons increases, the bond length shortens. This relationship is shown for selected bonds in Table 8.5.

Bond Energy and Enthalpy
Bond energy values can be used to calculate approximate energies for reactions. To
illustrate how this is done, we will calculate the change in energy that accompanies the
following reaction:
H2 1g2  F2 1g2 ¡ 2HF1g2
This reaction involves breaking one HOH and one FOF bond and forming two HOF
bonds. For bonds to be broken, energy must be added to the system—-an endothermic

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

TABLE 8.5

Bond Lengths for Selected Bonds

Bond

Bond Type

Bond Length (pm)

Bond Energy (kJ/mol)

COC
CPC
CqC
COO
CPO
CON
CPN
CqN

Single
Double
Triple
Single
Double
Single
Double
Triple

154
134
120
143
123
143
138
116

347
614
839
358
745
305
615
891

process. Consequently, the energy terms associated with bond breaking have positive signs.
The formation of a bond releases energy, an exothermic process, so the energy terms associated with bond making carry a negative sign. We can write the enthalpy change for a
reaction as follows:
¢H  sum of the energies required to break old bonds (positive signs)
plus the sum of the energies released in the formation of new
bonds (negative signs)
This leads to the expression

Energy required

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

¢H  ©D 1bonds broken2  ©D 1bonds formed2
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

352

Energy released

where  represents the sum of terms, and D represents the bond energy per mole of bonds.
(D always has a positive sign.)
In the case of the formation of HF,
¢H  DH¬H  DF¬F  2DH¬F
432 kJ
154 kJ
565 kJ
 1 mol 
 1 mol 
 2 mol 
mol
mol
mol
 544 kJ
Thus, when 1 mol H2(g) and 1 mol F2(g) react to form 2 mol HF(g), 544 kJ of energy
should be released.
This result can be compared with the calculation of H for this reaction from the
standard enthalpy of formation for HF (271 kJ/mol):
¢H°  2 mol  1271 kJ/mol2  542 kJ
Thus the use of bond energies to calculate H works quite well in this case.
Sample Exercise 8.5

H from Bond Energies
Using the bond energies listed in Table 8.4, calculate H for the reaction of methane with
chlorine and ﬂuorine to give Freon-12 (CF2Cl2).
CH4 1g2  2Cl2 1g2  2F2 1g2 ¡ CF2Cl2 1g2  2HF1g2  2HCl1g2

Solution
The idea here is to break the bonds in the gaseous reactants to give individual atoms and
then assemble these atoms into the gaseous products by forming new bonds:
Energy

Energy

Reactants ¬¡
atoms ¬¡
products
required
released

8.9 The Localized Electron Bonding Model

353

We then combine the energy changes to calculate H:
¢H  energy required to break bonds  energy released when bonds form
where the minus sign gives the correct sign to the energy terms for the exothermic
processes.
Reactant Bonds Broken:
CH4: 4 mol C¬H
2Cl2:

2 mol Cl¬Cl

2F2:

2 mol F¬FF

413 kJ
 1652 kJ
mol
239 kJ
2 mol 
 1478 kJ
mol
154 kJ
2 mol 
 2308 kJ
mol
Total energy required  2438 kJ
4 mol 

Product Bonds Formed:
CF2Cl2:

2 mol C¬F

2 mol 

485 kJ
 3970 kJ
mol

and
2 mol C¬Cl
HF:

2 mol H¬F

HCl: 2 mol H¬Cl

339 kJ
 3678 kJ
mol
565 kJ
2 mol 
 1130 kJ
mol
427 kJ
2 mol 
 3854 kJ
mol
Total energy released  3632 kJ
2 mol 

We now can calculate H:
¢H  energy required to break bonds  energy released when bonds form
 2438 kJ  3632 kJ
 1194 kJ
Since the sign of the value for the enthalpy change is negative, this means that 1194 kJ
of energy is released per mole of CF2Cl2 formed.
See Exercises 8.53 through 8.60.

8.9

The Localized Electron Bonding Model

So far we have discussed the general characteristics of the chemical bonding model and
have seen that properties such as bond strength and polarity can be assigned to individual bonds. In this section we introduce a speciﬁc model used to describe covalent bonds.
We need a simple model that can be applied easily even to very complicated molecules
and that can be used routinely by chemists to interpret and organize the wide variety of
chemical phenomena. The model that serves this purpose is the localized electron (LE)
model, which assumes that a molecule is composed of atoms that are bound together by
sharing pairs of electrons using the atomic orbitals of the bound atoms. Electron pairs in
the molecule are assumed to be localized on a particular atom or in the space between
two atoms. Those pairs of electrons localized on an atom are called lone pairs, and those
found in the space between the atoms are called bonding pairs.

354

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
As we will apply it, the LE model has three parts:
1. Description of the valence electron arrangement in the molecule using Lewis structures (will be discussed in the next section).
2. Prediction of the geometry of the molecule using the valence shell electron-pair
repulsion (VSEPR) model (will be discussed in Section 8.13).
3. Description of the type of atomic orbitals used by the atoms to share electrons or hold
lone pairs (will be discussed in Chapter 9).

8.10

Lewis structures show only valence
electrons.

Lewis Structures

The Lewis structure of a molecule shows how the valence electrons are arranged among
the atoms in the molecule. These representations are named after G. N. Lewis (Fig. 8.14).
The rules for writing Lewis structures are based on observations of thousands of
molecules. From experiment, chemists have learned that the most important requirement
for the formation of a stable compound is that the atoms achieve noble gas electron
conﬁgurations.
We have already seen that when metals and nonmetals react to form binary ionic compounds, electrons are transferred and the resulting ions typically have noble gas electron
conﬁgurations. An example is the formation of KBr, where the K ion has the [Ar] electron conﬁguration and the Br ion has the [Kr] electron conﬁguration. In writing Lewis
structures, the rule is that only the valence electrons are included. Using dots to represent
electrons, the Lewis structure for KBr is

No dots are shown on the K ion because it has no valence electrons. The Br ion is
shown with eight electrons because it has a ﬁlled valence shell.
Next we will consider Lewis structures for molecules with covalent bonds, involving
elements in the ﬁrst and second periods. The principle of achieving a noble gas electron
conﬁguration applies to these elements as follows:
• Hydrogen forms stable molecules where it shares two electrons. That is, it follows a
duet rule. For example, when two hydrogen atoms, each with one electron, combine to
form the H2 molecule, we have

By sharing electrons, each hydrogen in H2, in effect, has two electrons; that is, each
hydrogen has a ﬁlled valence shell.

FIGURE 8.14
G. N. Lewis (1875–1946).

• Helium does not form bonds because its valence orbital is already ﬁlled; it is a noble gas.
Helium has the electron conﬁguration 1s2 and can be represented by the Lewis structure
He :

8.10 Lewis Structures

355

• The second-row nonmetals carbon through ﬂuorine form stable molecules when they
are surrounded by enough electrons to ﬁll the valence orbitals, that is, the 2s and the
three 2p orbitals. Since eight electrons are required to ﬁll these orbitals, these elements
typically obey the octet rule; they are surrounded by eight electrons. An example is the
F2 molecule, which has the following Lewis structure:
Carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and ﬂuorine
always obey the octet rule in stable
molecules.

Note that each ﬂuorine atom in F2 is, in effect, surrounded by eight electrons, two of
which are shared with the other atom. This is a bonding pair of electrons, as discussed
earlier. Each ﬂuorine atom also has three pairs of electrons not involved in bonding.
These are the lone pairs.
• Neon does not form bonds because it already has an octet of valence electrons (it is a
noble gas). The Lewis structure is

Note that only the valence electrons of the neon atom (2s22p6) are represented by the
Lewis structure. The 1s2 electrons are core electrons and are not shown.
From the preceding discussion we can formulate the following rules for writing the
Lewis structures of molecules containing atoms from the ﬁrst two periods.

Steps for Writing Lewis Structures

➥1
➥2
➥3

Sum the valence electrons from all the atoms. Do not worry about keeping track
of which electrons come from which atoms. It is the total number of electrons
that is important.
Use a pair of electrons to form a bond between each pair of bound atoms.
Arrange the remaining electrons to satisfy the duet rule for hydrogen and the
octet rule for the second-row elements.

To see how these steps are applied, we will draw the Lewis structures of a few molecules. We will ﬁrst consider the water molecule and follow the previous steps.

➥1

We sum the valence electrons for H2O as shown:
1  1  6  8 valence electrons

p p p
H H O

➥2

Using a pair of electrons per bond, we draw in the two OOH single bonds:
H¬O¬H

Note that a line instead of a pair of dots is used to indicate each pair of bonding electrons.
This is the standard notation.

➥ 3 We distribute the remaining electrons to achieve a noble gas electron conﬁguration
for each atom. Since four electrons have been used in forming the two bonds, four electrons (8  4) remain to be distributed. Hydrogen is satisﬁed with two electrons (duet rule),
but oxygen needs eight electrons to have a noble gas conﬁguration. Thus the remaining

356

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
four electrons are added to oxygen as two lone pairs. Dots are used to represent the lone
pairs:

HOOOH represents H:O:H

This is the correct Lewis structure for the water molecule. Each hydrogen has two electrons and the oxygen has eight, as shown below:

As a second example, let’s write the Lewis structure for carbon dioxide. Summing
the valence electrons gives
4  6  6  16

p
C

p
p
O
O

After forming a bond between the carbon and each oxygen,
O¬C¬O
the remaining electrons are distributed to achieve noble gas conﬁgurations on each atom.
In this case we have 12 electrons (16  4) remaining after the bonds are drawn. The distribution of these electrons is determined by a trial-and-error process. We have 6 pairs of
electrons to distribute. Suppose we try 3 pairs on each oxygen to give

Is this correct? To answer this question, we need to check two things:
1. The total number of electrons. There are 16 valence electrons in this structure, which
is the correct number.
2. The octet rule for each atom. Each oxygen has 8 electrons, but the carbon has only
4. This cannot be the correct Lewis structure.
C O represents

O C

How can we arrange the 16 available electrons to achieve an octet for each atom?
Suppose there are 2 shared pairs between the carbon and each oxygen:

O

Now each atom is surrounded by 8 electrons, and the total number of electrons is 16, as
required. This is the correct Lewis structure for carbon dioxide, which has two double
bonds and four lone pairs.
Finally, let’s consider the Lewis structure of the CN (cyanide) ion. Summing the valence electrons, we have
CN
888
n
888
n
888n

O

4  5  1  10

357

8.10 Lewis Structures

Note that the negative charge means an extra electron is present. After drawing a single
bond (C—N), we distribute the remaining electrons to achieve a noble gas conﬁguration
for each atom. Eight electrons remain to be distributed. We can try various possibilities,
for example:

This structure is incorrect because C and N have only six electrons each instead of eight.
The correct arrangement is

(Satisfy yourself that both carbon and nitrogen have eight electrons.)
Sample Exercise 8.6

Writing Lewis Structures
Give the Lewis structure for each of the following.
a. HF
b. N2
c. NH3

d. CH4
e. CF4
f. NO

Solution
In each case we apply the three steps for writing Lewis structures. Recall that lines are
used to indicate shared electron pairs and that dots are used to indicate nonbonding pairs
(lone pairs). We have the following tabulated results:

Total
Valence
Electrons

Draw Single
Bonds

Calculate
Number of
Electrons
Remaining

Use Remaining
Electrons to
Achieve Noble
Gas Conﬁgurations

Check Number
of Electrons

a. HF

178

HOF

6

H F

H, 2
F, 8

b. N2

5  5  10

N N

8

N N

N, 8

c. NH3

5  3(1)  8

H N

H

2

H N
H

H

e. CF4

4  4(1)  8

4  4(7)  32

C

H

H

0

H

H

F

F
F

24

F

F
f. NO

5  6  1  10

N

C

H

C

F

H, 2
N, 8

H

H
d. CH4

H

C

H

H, 2
C, 8

F

F, 8
C, 8

F
O

8

[ N

O ]

N, 8
O, 8

See Exercises 8.67 and 8.68.

358

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Nitrogen Under Pressure
he element nitrogen exists at normal temperatures and
pressures as a gas containing N2, a molecule with a very
strong triple bond. In the gas phase the diatomic molecules
move around independently with almost no tendency to
associate with each other. Under intense pressure, however,
nitrogen changes to a dramatically different form. This
conclusion was reached at the Carnegie Institution in
Washington, D.C., by Mikhail Erements and his colleagues,
who subjected nitrogen to a pressure of 2.4 million atmospheres in a special diamond anvil press. Under this tremendous pressure the bonds of the N2 molecules break and a
substance containing an aggregate of nitrogen atoms forms.
In other words, under great pressure elemental nitrogen
changes from a substance containing diatomic molecules
to one containing many nitrogen atoms bonded to each other.
Interestingly, this substance remains intact even after the
pressure is released—-as long as the temperature remains at
100 K. This new form of nitrogen has a very high potential
energy relative to N2. Thus this substance would be an
extraordinarily powerful propellant or explosive if enough
of it could be made. This new form of nitrogen is also a
semiconductor for electricity; normal nitrogen gas is an
insulator.
The newly discovered form of nitrogen is signiﬁcant for
several reasons. For one thing, it may help us understand
the nature of the interiors of the giant gas planets such as
Jupiter. Also, their success in changing nitrogen to an atomic
solid encourages high-pressure scientists who are trying to

T

A diamond anvil cell used to study materials at very high pressures.

accomplish the same goal with hydrogen. It is surprising that
nitrogen, which has diatomic molecules containing bonds
more than twice as strong as those in hydrogen, will form
an atomic solid at these pressures but hydrogen does not.
Hydrogen remains a molecular solid at far greater pressures
than nitrogen can endure.

When writing Lewis structures, do not worry about which electrons come from which
atoms in a molecule. The best way to look at a molecule is to regard it as a new entity
that uses all the available valence electrons of the atoms to achieve the lowest possible
energy.* The valence electrons belong to the molecule, rather than to the individual atoms.
Simply distribute all valence electrons so that the various rules are satisﬁed, without regard for the origin of each particular electron.

8.11

Exceptions to the Octet Rule

The localized electron model is a simple but very successful model, and the rules we have
used for Lewis structures apply to most molecules. However, with such a simple model,
some exceptions are inevitable. Boron, for example, tends to form compounds in which
the boron atom has fewer than eight electrons around it—it does not have a complete
octet. Boron triﬂuoride (BF3), a gas at normal temperatures and pressures, reacts very
*In a sense this approach corrects for the fact that the localized electron model overemphasizes that a molecule is simply a sum of its parts—that is, that the atoms retain their individual identities in the molecule.

8.11 Exceptions to the Octet Rule

359

energetically with molecules such as water and ammonia that have available electron pairs
(lone pairs). The violent reactivity of BF3 with electron-rich molecules arises because the
boron atom is electron-deﬁcient. Boron triﬂuoride has 24 valence electrons. The Lewis
structure often drawn for BF3 is

Note that in this structure boron has only 6 electrons around it. The octet rule for boron
can be satisﬁed by drawing a structure with a double bond, such as

Recent studies indicate that double bonding may be important in BF3. However, the
boron atom in BF3 certainly behaves as if it is electron-deﬁcient, as indicated by the reactivity of BF3 toward electron-rich molecules, for example, toward NH3 to form H3NBF3:

In this stable compound, boron has an octet of electrons.
It is characteristic of boron to form molecules in which the boron atom is electrondeﬁcient. On the other hand, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and ﬂuorine can be counted on to
obey the octet rule.
Some atoms exceed the octet rule. This behavior is observed only for those elements
in Period 3 of the periodic table and beyond. To see how this arises, we will consider the
Lewis structure for sulfur hexaﬂuoride (SF6), a well-known and very stable molecule. The
sum of the valence electrons is
6  6172  48 electrons
Indicating the single bonds gives the structure on the left below:

We have used 12 electrons to form the SOF bonds, which leaves 36 electrons. Since ﬂuorine always follows the octet rule, we complete the six ﬂuorine octets to give the structure
on the right above. This structure uses all 48 valence electrons for SF6, but sulfur has
12 electrons around it; that is, sulfur exceeds the octet rule. How can this happen?
To answer this question, we need to consider the different types of valence orbitals
characteristic of second- and third-period elements. The second-row elements have 2s and
2p valence orbitals, and the third-row elements have 3s, 3p, and 3d orbitals. The 3s and
3p orbitals ﬁll with electrons in going from sodium to argon, but the 3d orbitals remain
empty. For example, the valence orbital diagram for a sulfur atom is

3s

3p

3d

360

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

Third-row elements can exceed the
octet rule.

The localized electron model assumes that the empty 3d orbitals can be used to accommodate extra electrons. Thus the sulfur atom in SF6 can have 12 electrons around it by
using the 3s and 3p orbitals to hold 8 electrons, with the extra 4 electrons placed in the
formerly empty 3d orbitals.

Lewis Structures: Comments About the Octet Rule

Whether the atoms that exceed the octet
rule actually place the extra electrons in
their d orbitals is a matter of controversy
among theoretical chemists. We will not
consider this issue in this text.

Sample Exercise 8.7

䊉

The second-row elements C, N, O, and F should always be assumed to obey the octet
rule.

䊉

The second-row elements B and Be often have fewer than eight electrons around them
in their compounds. These electron-deﬁcient compounds are very reactive.

䊉

The second-row elements never exceed the octet rule, since their valence orbitals (2s
and 2p) can accommodate only eight electrons.

䊉

Third-row and heavier elements often satisfy the octet rule but can exceed the octet
rule by using their empty valence d orbitals.

䊉

When writing the Lewis structure for a molecule, satisfy the octet rule for the atoms
ﬁrst. If electrons remain after the octet rule has been satisﬁed, then place them on
the elements having available d orbitals (elements in Period 3 or beyond).

Lewis Structures for Molecules That Violate the Octet Rule I
Write the Lewis structure for PCl5.
Solution
We can follow the same stepwise procedure we used above for sulfur hexaﬂuoride.

➥1

Sum the valence electrons.
5  5172  40 electrons
h
P

➥2

h
Cl

Indicate single bonds between bound atoms.

➥3

Distribute the remaining electrons. In this case, 30 electrons (40  10) remain.
These are used to satisfy the octet rule for each chlorine atom. The ﬁnal Lewis structure is

Note that phosphorus, which is a third-row element, has exceeded the octet rule by two
electrons.
See Exercises 8.71 and 8.72.
In the PCl5 and SF6 molecules, the central atoms (P and S, respectively) must have
the extra electrons. However, in molecules having more than one atom that can exceed
the octet rule, it is not always clear which atom should have the extra electrons. Consider

8.11 Exceptions to the Octet Rule

361

the Lewis structure for the triiodide ion (I3), which has
3172  1  22 valence electrons
h
1

h
1  charge

Indicating the single bonds gives IOIOI. At this point, 18 electrons (22  4) remain.
Trial and error will convince you that one of the iodine atoms must exceed the octet rule,
but which one?
The rule we will follow is that when it is necessary to exceed the octet rule for one
of several third-row (or higher) elements, assume that the extra electrons should be placed
on the central atom.
Thus for I3 the Lewis structure is

where the central iodine exceeds the octet rule. This structure agrees with known properties
of I3.
Sample Exercise 8.8

Lewis Structures for Molecules That Violate the Octet Rule II
Write the Lewis structure for each molecule or ion.
a. ClF3

b. XeO3

c. RnCl2

d. BeCl2

e. ICl4

Solution
a. The chlorine atom (third row) accepts the extra electrons.

b. All atoms obey the octet rule.

c. Radon, a noble gas in Period 6, accepts the extra electrons.

d. Beryllium is electron-deﬁcient.

e. Iodine exceeds the octet rule.

See Exercises 8.71 and 8.72.

362

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

8.12

Resonance

Sometimes more than one valid Lewis structure (one that obeys the rules we have outlined) is possible for a given molecule. Consider the Lewis structure for the nitrate ion
(NO3), which has 24 valence electrons. To achieve an octet of electrons around each
atom, a structure like this is required:

If this structure accurately represents the bonding in NO3, there should be two types of
N777O bonds observed in the molecule: one shorter bond (the double bond) and two identical longer ones (the two single bonds). However, experiments clearly show that NO3
exhibits only one type of N777O bond with a length and strength between those expected
for a single bond and a double bond. Thus, although the structure we have shown above
is a valid Lewis structure, it does not correctly represent the bonding in NO3. This is a
serious problem, and it means that the model must be modiﬁed.
Look again at the proposed Lewis structure for NO3. There is no reason for choosing a particular oxygen atom to have the double bond. There are really three valid Lewis
structures:

Is any of these structures a correct description of the bonding in NO3? No, because NO3
does not have one double and two single bonds—it has three equivalent bonds. We can
solve this problem by making the following assumption: The correct description of NO3
is not given by any one of the three Lewis structures but is given only by the superposition of all three.
The nitrate ion does not exist as any of the three extreme structures but exists as an
average of all three. Resonance is invoked when more than one valid Lewis structure can
be written for a particular molecule. The resulting electron structure of the molecule is
given by the average of these resonance structures. This situation is usually represented
by double-headed arrows as follows:

Note that in all these resonance structures the arrangement of the nuclei is the same. Only
the placement of the electrons differs. The arrows do not mean that the molecule “ﬂips”
from one resonance to another. They simply show that the actual structure is an average
of the three resonance structures.
The concept of resonance is necessary because the localized electron model postulates that electrons are localized between a given pair of atoms. However, nature does not
really operate this way. Electrons are really delocalized—they can move around the entire
molecule. The valence electrons in the NO3 molecule distribute themselves to provide
equivalent N777O bonds. Resonance is necessary to compensate for the defective assumption of the localized electron model. However, this model is so useful that we retain the

8.12 Resonance

363

concept of localized electrons and add resonance to allow the model to treat species such
as NO3.
Sample Exercise 8.9

Resonance Structures
Describe the electron arrangement in the nitrite anion (NO2) using the localized electron
model.
Solution
We will follow the usual procedure for obtaining the Lewis structure for the NO2 ion.
In NO2 there are 5  2(6)  1  18 valence electrons. Indicating the single bonds gives
the structure
O¬N¬O
The remaining 14 electrons (18  4) can be distributed to produce these structures:

This is a resonance situation. Two equivalent Lewis structures can be drawn. The electronic structure of the molecule is correctly represented not by either resonance structure
but by the average of the two. There are two equivalent N777O bonds, each one intermediate
between a single and a double bond.
See Exercises 8.73 through 8.78.

Odd-Electron Molecules
Relatively few molecules formed from nonmetals contain odd numbers of electrons. One
common example is nitric oxide (NO), which is formed when nitrogen and oxygen gases
react at the high temperatures in automobile engines. Nitric oxide is emitted into the air,
where it immediately reacts with oxygen to form gaseous nitrogen dioxide (NO2), another
odd-electron molecule.
Since the localized electron model is based on pairs of electrons, it does not handle
odd-electron cases in a natural way. To treat odd-electron molecules, a more sophisticated
model is needed.

Formal Charge
Equivalent Lewis structures contain the
same numbers of single and multiple
bonds. For example, the resonance
structures for O3

O

O

and

O
O

O

O

are equivalent Lewis structures. These
are equally important in describing the
bonding in O3. Nonequivalent Lewis
structures contain different numbers of
single and multiple bonds.

Molecules or polyatomic ions containing atoms that can exceed the octet rule often have
many nonequivalent Lewis structures, all of which obey the rules for writing Lewis structures. For example, as we will see in detail below, the sulfate ion has a Lewis structure
with all single bonds and several Lewis structures that contain double bonds. How do we
decide which of the many possible Lewis structures best describes the actual bonding in
sulfate? One method is to estimate the charge on each atom in the various possible Lewis
structures and use these charges to select the most appropriate structure(s). We will see
below how this is done, but ﬁrst we must decide on a method to assign atomic charges in
molecules.
In Chapter 4 we discussed one system for obtaining charges, called oxidation states.
However, in assigning oxidation states, we always count both the shared electrons as
belonging to the more electronegative atom in a bond. This practice leads to highly
exaggerated estimates of charge. In other words, although oxidation states are useful for
bookkeeping electrons in redox reactions, they are not realistic estimates of the actual

364

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
charges on individual atoms in a molecule, so they are not suitable for judging the
appropriateness of Lewis structures. Another deﬁnition of the charge on an atom in a molecule, the formal charge, can, however, be used to evaluate Lewis structures. As we will
see below, the formal charge of an atom in a molecule is the difference between the number of valence electrons on the free atom and the number of valence electrons assigned
to the atom in the molecule.
Therefore, to determine the formal charge of a given atom in a molecule, we need to
know two things:
1. The number of valence electrons on the free neutral atom (which has zero net charge
because the number of electrons equals the number of protons)
2. The number of valence electrons “belonging” to the atom in a molecule
We then compare these numbers. If in the molecule the atom has the same number of valence electrons as it does in the free state, the positive and negative charges just balance,
and it has a formal charge of zero. If the atom has one more valence electron in a molecule than it has as a free atom, it has a formal charge of 1, and so on. Thus the formal
charge on an atom in a molecule is deﬁned as
Formal charge  1number of valence electrons on free atom2
 1number of valence electrons assigned to the atom in the molecule2
To compute the formal charge of an atom in a molecule, we assign the valence
electrons in the molecule to the various atoms, making the following assumptions:
1. Lone pair electrons belong entirely to the atom in question.
2. Shared electrons are divided equally between the two sharing atoms.
Thus the number of valence electrons assigned to a given atom is calculated as follows:
1Valence electrons2 assigned  1number of lone pair electrons2
 12 1number of shared electrons2
We will illustrate the procedure for calculating formal charges by considering two of
the possible Lewis structures for the sulfate ion, which has 32 valence electrons. For the
Lewis structure

each oxygen atom has 6 lone pair electrons and shares 2 electrons with the sulfur atom.
Thus, using the preceding assumptions, each oxygen is assigned 7 valence electrons.
Valence electrons assigned to each oxygen  6 plus 12 122  7
h
h
Lone
Shared
pair
electrons
electrons

Formal charge on oxygen  6 minus 7  1

h
h
Valence electrons AA
on a free O atom A
Valence electrons
assigned to each O
in SO4 2

8.12 Resonance

365

The formal charge on each oxygen is 1.
For the sulfur atom there are no lone pair electrons, and eight electrons are shared
with the oxygen atoms. Thus, for sulfur,
Valence electrons assigned to sulfur  0 plus 12 182  4
h
h
Lone
Shared
pair
electrons
electrons

Formal charge on sulfur  6 minus 4  2

h
h
A
Valence electrons A
on a free S atom A
Valence
electrons
assigned to S
in SO42

A second possible Lewis structure is

In this case the formal charges are as follows:
For oxygen atoms with single bonds:
Valence electrons assigned  6  12 122  7
Formal charge  6  7  1
For oxygen atoms with double bonds:
Valence electrons assigned  4  12 142  6
h
Each double
bond has 4
electrons

Formal charge  6  6  0
For the sulfur atom:
Valence electrons assigned  0  12 1122  6
Formal charge  6  6  0
We will use two fundamental assumptions about formal charges to evaluate Lewis
structures:
1. Atoms in molecules try to achieve formal charges as close to zero as possible.
2. Any negative formal charges are expected to reside on the most electronegative atoms.
We can use these principles to evaluate the two Lewis structures for sulfate given previously. Notice that in the structure with only single bonds, each oxygen has a formal charge
of 1, while the sulfur has a formal charge of 2. In contrast, in the structure with two
double bonds and two single bonds, the sulfur and two oxygen atoms have a formal charge
of 0, while two oxygens have a formal charge of 1. Based on the assumptions given
above, the structure with two double bonds is preferred—it has lower formal charges and

366

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
the 1 formal charges are on electronegative oxygen atoms. Thus, for the sulfate ion, we
might expect resonance structures such as

to more closely describe the bonding than the Lewis structure with only single bonds.

Rules Governing Formal Charge
䊉

To calculate the formal charge on an atom:
1. Take the sum of the lone pair electrons and one-half the shared electrons. This is
the number of valence electrons assigned to the atom in the molecule.
2. Subtract the number of assigned electrons from the number of valence electrons
on the free, neutral atom to obtain the formal charge.

Sample Exercise 8.10

䊉

The sum of the formal charges of all atoms in a given molecule or ion must equal the
overall charge on that species.

䊉

If nonequivalent Lewis structures exist for a species, those with formal charges closest to zero and with any negative formal charges on the most electronegative atoms
are considered to best describe the bonding in the molecule or ion.

Formal Charges
Give possible Lewis structures for XeO3, an explosive compound of xenon. Which Lewis
structure or structures are most appropriate according to the formal charges?
Solution
For XeO3 (26 valence electrons) we can draw the following possible Lewis structures (formal charges are indicated in parentheses):

Based on the ideas of formal charge, we would predict that the Lewis structures with the
lower values of formal charge would be most appropriate for describing the bonding in
XeO3.
See Exercises 8.81 through 8.86.
As a ﬁnal note, there are a couple of cautions about formal charge to keep in mind.
First, although formal charges are closer to actual atomic charges in molecules than are
oxidation states, formal charges still provide only estimates of charge—they should not

8.13 Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

367

be taken as actual atomic charges. Second, the evaluation of Lewis structures using formal charge ideas can lead to erroneous predictions. Tests based on experiments must be
used to make the ﬁnal decisions on the correct description of the bonding in a molecule
or polyatomic ion.

8.13

Visualization:VSEPR

BeCl2 has only four electrons around Be
and is expected to be very reactive with
electron-pair donors.

Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

The structures of molecules play a very important role in determining their chemical properties. As we will see later, this is particularly important for biological molecules; a slight
change in the structure of a large biomolecule can completely destroy its usefulness to a
cell or may even change the cell from a normal one to a cancerous one.
Many accurate methods now exist for determining molecular structure, the threedimensional arrangement of the atoms in a molecule. These methods must be used if
precise information about structure is required. However, it is often useful to be able to
predict the approximate molecular structure of a molecule. In this section we consider a
simple model that allows us to do this. This model, called the valence shell electron-pair
repulsion (VSEPR) model, is useful in predicting the geometries of molecules formed
from nonmetals. The main postulate of this model is that the structure around a given
atom is determined principally by minimizing electron-pair repulsions. The idea here is
that the bonding and nonbonding pairs around a given atom will be positioned as far apart
as possible. To see how this model works, we will ﬁrst consider the molecule BeCl2, which
has the Lewis structure

Note that there are two pairs of electrons around the beryllium atom. What arrangement
of these electron pairs allows them to be as far apart as possible to minimize the repulsions? Clearly, the best arrangement places the pairs on opposite sides of the beryllium
atom at 180 degrees from each other:
Visualization: VSEPR: Two
Electron Pairs

This is the maximum possible separation for two electron pairs. Once we have determined
the optimal arrangement of the electron pairs around the central atom, we can specify the
molecular structure of BeCl2, that is, the positions of the atoms. Since each electron pair
on beryllium is shared with a chlorine atom, the molecule has a linear structure with a
180-degree bond angle:
Cl Be

Cl

180

Next, let’s consider BF3, which has the Lewis structure

Here the boron atom is surrounded by three pairs of electrons. What arrangement will
minimize the repulsions? The electron pairs are farthest apart at angles of 120 degrees:

Visualization: VSEPR: Three
Electron Pairs

368

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
Since each of the electron pairs is shared with a ﬂuorine atom, the molecular structure
will be

This is a planar (ﬂat) and triangular molecule, which is commonly described as a trigonal planar structure.
Next, let’s consider the methane molecule, which has the Lewis structure

There are four pairs of electrons around the central carbon atom. What arrangement of these
electron pairs best minimizes the repulsions? First, let’s try a square planar arrangement:

The carbon atom and the electron pairs are centered in the plane of the paper, and the angles between the pairs are all 90 degrees.
Is there another arrangement with angles greater than 90 degrees that would put the
electron pairs even farther away from each other? The answer is yes. The tetrahedral
structure has angles of 109.5 degrees:

C

C

109.5˚

C

Visualization: VSEPR: Four
Electron Pairs

H

C

H

H
H

FIGURE 8.15
The molecular structure of methane. The
tetrahedral arrangement of electron pairs
produces a tetrahedral arrangement of
hydrogen atoms.

It can be shown that this is the maximum possible separation of four pairs around a given
atom. This means that whenever four pairs of electrons are present around an atom, they
should always be arranged tetrahedrally.
Now that we have the electron-pair arrangement that gives the least repulsion, we can
determine the positions of the atoms and thus the molecular structure of CH4. In methane,
each of the four electron pairs is shared between the carbon atom and a hydrogen atom.
Thus the hydrogen atoms are placed as in Fig. 8.15, and the molecule has a tetrahedral
structure with the carbon atom at the center.
Recall that the main idea of the VSEPR model is to ﬁnd the arrangement of electron
pairs around the central atom that minimizes the repulsions. Then we can determine the
molecular structure from knowing how the electron pairs are shared with the peripheral
atoms. Use the following steps to predict the structure of a molecule using the VSEPR
model.

8.13 Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

369

Steps to Apply the VSEPR Model

➥1
➥2
➥3
➥4

Draw the Lewis structure for the molecule.
Count the electron pairs and arrange them in the way that minimizes repulsion
(that is, put the pairs as far apart as possible).
Determine the positions of the atoms from the way the electron pairs are shared.
Determine the name of the molecular structure from the positions of the atoms.

We will predict the structure of ammonia (NH3) using this stepwise approach.

➥1

Draw the Lewis structure:
H N H
H

➥2

Count the pairs of electrons and arrange them to minimize repulsions. The NH3
molecule has four pairs of electrons: three bonding pairs and one nonbonding pair. From
the discussion of the methane molecule, we know that the best arrangement of four electron pairs is a tetrahedral array, as shown in Fig. 8.16(a).

➥ 3 Determine the positions of the atoms. The three H atoms share electron pairs, as
shown in Fig. 8.16(b).

When four uniform balloons are tied
together, they naturally form a tetrahedral
shape.

Sample Exercise 8.11

➥ 4 Name the molecular structure. It is very important to recognize that the name of
the molecular structure is always based on the positions of the atoms. The placement of
the electron pairs determines the structure, but the name is based on the positions of the
atoms. Thus it is incorrect to say that the NH3 molecule is tetrahedral. It has a tetrahedral
arrangement of electron pairs but not a tetrahedral arrangement of atoms. The molecular
structure of ammonia is a trigonal pyramid (one side is different from the other three)
rather than a tetrahedron, as shown in Fig. 8.16(c).
Prediction of Molecular Structure I
Describe the molecular structure of the water molecule.
Solution
The Lewis structure for water is
H

O

H

There are four pairs of electrons: two bonding pairs and two nonbonding pairs. To minimize repulsions, these are best arranged in a tetrahedral array, as shown in Fig. 8.17(a).
FIGURE 8.16
(a) The tetrahedral arrangement of electron
pairs around the nitrogen atom in the ammonia molecule. (b) Three of the electron
pairs around nitrogen are shared with hydrogen atoms as shown and one is a lone
pair. Although the arrangement of electron
pairs is tetrahedral, as in the methane molecule, the hydrogen atoms in the ammonia
molecule occupy only three corners of the
tetrahedron. A lone pair occupies the fourth
corner. (c) Note that molecular geometry is
trigonal pyramidal, not tetrahedral.

Lone
pair

N

N

H
H
H
(a)

(b)

(c)

370

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

Lone
pair

Bonding
pair

FIGURE 8.17
(a) The tetrahedral arrangement of the four
electron pairs around oxygen in the water
molecule. (b) Two of the electron pairs are
shared between oxygen and the hydrogen
atoms and two are lone pairs. (c) The
V-shaped molecular structure of the water
molecule.

Bonding
pair

O

O

H
H
Lone pair
(a)

(b)

(c)

Although H2O has a tetrahedral arrangement of electron pairs, it is not a tetrahedral molecule. The atoms in the H2O molecule form a V shape, as shown in Fig. 8.17(b) and (c).
See Exercises 8.91 and 8.92.
From Sample Exercise 8.11 we see that the H2O molecule is V-shaped, or bent, because of the presence of the lone pairs. If no lone pairs were present, the molecule would
be linear, the polar bonds would cancel, and the molecule would have no dipole moment.
This would make water very different from the polar substance so familiar to us.
From the previous discussion we would predict that the HOXOH bond angle (where
X is the central atom) in CH4, NH3, and H2O should be the tetrahedral angle of 109.5
degrees. Experimental studies, however, show that the actual bond angles are those given
in Fig. 8.18. What signiﬁcance do these results have for the VSEPR model? One possible point of view is that we should be pleased to have the observed angles so close to the
tetrahedral angle. The opposite view is that the deviations are signiﬁcant enough to require
modiﬁcation of the simple model so that it can more accurately handle similar cases. We
will take the latter view.
Let us examine the following data:

CH4

NH3

H2O

0

1

2

109.5

107

104.5

Number of Lone Pairs
Bond Angle

One interpretation of the trend observed here is that lone pairs require more space than
bonding pairs; in other words, as the number of lone pairs increases, the bonding pairs
are increasingly squeezed together.

Methane

Ammonia

Water

N

O

H

FIGURE 8.18
The bond angles in the CH4, NH3, and H2O
molecules. Note that the bond angle
between bonding pairs decreases as the
number of lone pairs increases. Note that
all of the angles in CH4 are 109.5 degrees
and all of the angles in NH3 are 107
degrees.

C

H

H
H

H
H
107˚

109.5˚
H

H

104.5˚

H

8.13 Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

H

X

(a)

X

(b)

FIGURE 8.19
(a) In a bonding pair of electrons, the
electrons are shared by two nuclei. (b) In a
lone pair, both electrons must be close to a
single nucleus and tend to take up more of
the space around that atom.

371

This interpretation seems to make physical sense if we think in the following terms.
A bonding pair is shared between two nuclei, and the electrons can be close to either
nucleus. They are relatively conﬁned between the two nuclei. A lone pair is localized on
only one nucleus, and both electrons will be close only to that nucleus, as shown schematically in Fig. 8.19. These pictures help us understand why a lone pair may require more
space near an atom than a bonding pair.
As a result of these observations, we make the following addition to the original
postulate of the VSEPR model: Lone pairs require more room than bonding pairs and
tend to compress the angles between the bonding pairs.
So far we have considered cases with two, three, and four electron pairs around the
central atom. These are summarized in Table 8.6.
Table 8.7 summarizes the structures possible for molecules in which there are four
electron pairs around the central atom with various numbers of atoms bonded to it. Note
that molecules with four pairs of electrons around the central atom can be tetrahedral
(AB4), trigonal pyramidal (AB3), and V-shaped (AB2).
For ﬁve pairs of electrons, there are several possible choices. The one that produces
minimum repulsion is a trigonal bipyramid. Note from Table 8.6 that this arrangement

TABLE 8.6 Arrangements of Electron Pairs Around an Atom Yielding
Minimum Repulsion
Number of
Electron Pairs

Arrangement of Electron Pairs

2

Linear

3

Trigonal
planar

4

Tetrahedral

Example

A

A

A

90˚

5

Trigonal
bipyramidal

120˚

A

90˚

6

Octahedral

90˚

A

372

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

TABLE 8.7 Structures of Molecules That
Have Four Electron Pairs Around the
Central Atom

TABLE 8.8 Structures of Molecules
with Five Electron Pairs Around the
Central Atom

Electron-Pair
Arrangement

Electron-Pair
Arrangement

Molecular Structure

B

B

B

B

B

B

B
A

B

B

B

B

A

B
B

B

Tetrahedral

A

B

B

B

Trigonal
bipyramidal

B

B

B

B

A

B

B

B

A

B

A

Molecular Structure

Trigonal pyramid

B

B
A

B

A

B

B

B
A

B

B

A
B

“See-saw”

B
B

B

V-shaped (bent)

B
A

B

B

A
B

B

B

T-structure

B
A

A
B
B

Linear

has two different angles, 90 degrees and 120 degrees. As the name suggests, the structure formed by this arrangement of pairs consists of two trigonal-based pyramids that
share a common base. Table 8.8 summarizes the structures possible for molecules in
which there are ﬁve electron pairs around the central atom with various numbers of
atoms bonded to it. Note that molecules with ﬁve pairs of electrons around the central
atom can be trigonal bipyramidal (AB5), see-saw (AB4), T-shaped (AB3), and linear
(AB2).
Six pairs of electrons can best be arranged around a given atom with 90-degree angles
to form an octahedral structure, as shown in Table 8.6.
To use the VSEPR model to determine the geometric structures of molecules, you
should memorize the relationships between the number of electron pairs and their best
arrangement.

373

8.13 Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

Sample Exercise 8.12

Prediction of Molecular Structure II
When phosphorus reacts with excess chlorine gas, the compound phosphorus pentachloride (PCl5) is formed. In the gaseous and liquid states, this substance consists of PCl5
molecules, but in the solid state it consists of a 1 : 1 mixture of PCl4 and PCl6 ions.
Predict the geometric structures of PCl5, PCl4, and PCl6.
Solution
The Lewis structure for PCl5 is shown. Five pairs of electrons around the phosphorus atom
require a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement (see Table 8.6). When the chlorine atoms are
included, a trigonal bipyramidal molecule results:
Cl

Cl

Cl
P

Cl

P

Cl

Cl

P

Cl

Cl

Cl

Cl

The Lewis structure for the PCl4 ion (5  4(7)  1  32 valence electrons) is shown
below. There are four pairs of electrons surrounding the phosphorus atom in the PCl4
ion, which requires a tetrahedral arrangement of the pairs. Since each pair is shared with
a chlorine atom, a tetrahedral PCl4 cation results.
+

+

Cl

Cl

P

Cl
Cl

P

P
Cl

Cl

Cl

Cl

The Lewis structure for PCl6 (5  6(7)  1  48 valence electrons) is shown below. Since phosphorus is surrounded by six pairs of electrons, an octahedral arrangement
is required to minimize repulsions, as shown below in the center. Since each electron pair
is shared with a chlorine atom, an octahedral PCl6 anion is predicted.
–

–

Cl
Cl

Cl
Cl

Cl

Cl

P

P

P

Cl

Cl
Cl

Cl
Cl

Cl

See Exercises 8.89, 8.90, 8.93, and 8.94.

Sample Exercise 8.13
Visualization: VSEPR: Iodine
Pentaﬂuoride

Prediction of Molecular Structure III
Because the noble gases have ﬁlled s and p valence orbitals, they were not expected to be
chemically reactive. In fact, for many years these elements were called inert gases because
of this supposed inability to form any compounds. However, in the early 1960s several
compounds of krypton, xenon, and radon were synthesized. For example, a team at the

374

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
Argonne National Laboratory produced the stable colorless compound xenon tetraﬂuoride
(XeF4). Predict its structure and whether it has a dipole moment.
Solution
The Lewis structure for XeF4 is

The xenon atom in this molecule is surrounded by six pairs of electrons, which means an
octahedral arrangement.

Xe

The structure predicted for this molecule will depend on how the lone pairs and bonding pairs are arranged. Consider the two possibilities shown in Fig. 8.20. The bonding
pairs are indicated by the presence of the ﬂuorine atoms. Since the structure predicted differs in the two cases, we must decide which of these arrangements is preferable. The key
is to look at the lone pairs. In the structure in part (a), the lone pair–lone pair angle is
90 degrees; in the structure in part (b), the lone pairs are separated by 180 degrees. Since
lone pairs require more room than bonding pairs, a structure with two lone pairs at
90 degrees is unfavorable. Thus the arrangement in Fig. 8.20(b) is preferred, and the
molecular structure is predicted to be square planar. Note that this molecule is not described
as being octahedral. There is an octahedral arrangement of electron pairs, but the atoms
form a square planar structure.
Although each Xe—F bond is polar (ﬂuorine has a greater electronegativity than
xenon), the square planar arrangement of these bonds causes the polarities to cancel.
Thus XeF4 has no dipole moment, as shown in the margin.
See Exercises 8.95 through 8.98.

F

F

F
Xe
F

leads to the
structure

F

F

F
Xe

Xe
F

F
F

(a)

90°

180°
F

leads to the
structure

F

F
Xe

F

F
(b)

FIGURE 8.20
Possible electron-pair arrangements for XeF4. Since arrangement (a) has lone pairs at 90 degrees from each other, it is less favorable than
arrangement (b), where the lone pairs are at 180 degrees.

F

375

8.13 Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

I

I

I

I

90°
I

FIGURE 8.21
Three possible arrangements of the electron
pairs in the I3 ion. Arrangement (c) is
preferred because there are no 90-degree
lone pair–lone pair interactions.

I
90°

90°

I

120°

I
I

(a)

(b)

(c)

We can further illustrate the use of the VSEPR model for molecules or ions with lone
pairs by considering the triiodide ion (I3).

–
I

I

I

I

The central iodine atom has ﬁve pairs around it, which requires a trigonal bipyramidal
arrangement. Several possible arrangements of lone pairs are shown in Fig. 8.21. Note
that structures (a) and (b) have lone pairs at 90 degrees, whereas in (c) all lone pairs are
at 120 degrees. Thus structure (c) is preferred. The resulting molecular structure for I3
is linear:
3I¬I ¬I4 

The VSEPR Model and Multiple Bonds
So far in our treatment of the VSEPR model we have not considered any molecules
with multiple bonds. To see how these molecules are handled by this model, let’s consider the NO3 ion, which requires three resonance structures to describe its electronic
structure:

The NO3 ion is known to be planar with 120-degree bond angles:

O
120°
N
O

O

376

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
This planar structure is the one expected for three pairs of electrons around a central atom,
which means that a double bond should be counted as one effective pair in using the
VSEPR model. This makes sense because the two pairs of electrons involved in the double bond are not independent pairs. Both the electron pairs must be in the space between
the nuclei of the two atoms to form the double bond. In other words, the double bond acts
as one center of electron density to repel the other pairs of electrons. The same holds true
for triple bonds. This leads us to another general rule: For the VSEPR model, multiple
bonds count as one effective electron pair.
The molecular structure of nitrate also shows us one more important point: When a
molecule exhibits resonance, any one of the resonance structures can be used to predict
the molecular structure using the VSEPR model. These rules are illustrated in Sample
Exercise 8.14.

Sample Exercise 8.14

Structures of Molecules with Multiple Bonds
Predict the molecular structure of the sulfur dioxide molecule. Is this molecule expected
to have a dipole moment?
Solution
First, we must determine the Lewis structure for the SO2 molecule, which has 18 valence
electrons. The expected resonance structures are

To determine the molecular structure, we must count the electron pairs around the sulfur
atom. In each resonance structure the sulfur has one lone pair, one pair in a single bond,
and one double bond. Counting the double bond as one pair yields three effective pairs
around the sulfur. According to Table 8.6, a trigonal planar arrangement is required, which
yields a V-shaped molecule:

Thus the structure of the SO2 molecule is expected to be V-shaped, with a 120-degree
bond angle. The molecule has a dipole moment directed as shown:

Since the molecule is V-shaped, the polar bonds do not cancel.
See Exercises 8.99 and 8.100.

It should be noted at this point that lone pairs that are oriented at least 120 degrees
from other pairs do not produce signiﬁcant distortions of bond angles. For example, the
angle in the SO2 molecule is actually quite close to 120 degrees. We will follow the

8.13 Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

general principle that a 120-degree angle provides lone pairs with enough space so that
distortions do not occur. Angles less than 120 degrees are distorted when lone pairs are
present.

H

C

H

O

Molecules Containing No Single Central Atom

H

(a)

377

So far we have considered molecules consisting of one central atom surrounded by
other atoms. The VSEPR model can be readily extended to more complicated molecules, such as methanol (CH3OH). This molecule is represented by the following Lewis
structure:

C
O

H

(b)

H

H

C

H

The molecular structure can be predicted from the arrangement of pairs around the
carbon and oxygen atoms. Note that there are four pairs of electrons around the
carbon, which requires a tetrahedral arrangement, as shown in Fig. 8.22(a). The oxygen also has four pairs, which requires a tetrahedral arrangement. However, in this case
the tetrahedron will be slightly distorted by the space requirements of the lone pairs
[Fig. 8.22(b)]. The overall geometric arrangement for the molecule is shown in
Fig. 8.22(c).

O
(c)

H

FIGURE 8.22
The molecular structure of methanol.
(a) The arrangement of electron pairs and
atoms around the carbon atom. (b) The
arrangement of bonding and lone pairs
around the oxygen atom. (c) The molecular
structure.

Summary of the VSEPR Model
The rules for using the VSEPR model to predict molecular structure follow:
䊉

Determine the Lewis structure(s) for the molecule.

䊉

For molecules with resonance structures, use any of the structures to predict the molecular structure.

䊉

Sum the electron pairs around the central atom.

䊉

In counting pairs, count each multiple bond as a single effective pair.

䊉

The arrangement of the pairs is determined by minimizing electron-pair repulsions.
These arrangements are shown in Table 8.6.

䊉

Lone pairs require more space than bonding pairs do. Choose an arrangement that gives the lone pairs as much room as possible. Recognize that the
lone pairs may produce a slight distortion of the structure at angles less than
120 degrees.

The VSEPR Model—How Well Does It Work?
The VSEPR model is very simple. There are only a few rules to remember, yet the model
correctly predicts the molecular structures of most molecules formed from nonmetallic elements. Molecules of any size can be treated by applying the VSEPR model to each appropriate atom (those bonded to at least two other atoms) in the molecule. Thus we can
use this model to predict the structures of molecules with hundreds of atoms. It does,

378

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Chemical Structure and Communication:
Semiochemicals
n this chapter we have stressed the
importance of being able to predict
the three-dimensional structure of a
molecule. Molecular structure is important because of its effect on chemical
reactivity. This is especially true in biological systems, where reactions must
be efﬁcient and highly speciﬁc. Among
the hundreds of types of molecules
in the ﬂuids of a typical biological system, the appropriate reactants must ﬁnd
and react only with each other—-they
must be very discriminating. This speciﬁcity depends largely on structure. The
molecules are constructed so that only
the appropriate partners can approach
each other in a way that allows reaction.
Another area where molecular structure is central is in
the use of molecules as a means of communication. Examples of a chemical communication occur in humans in the
conduction of nerve impulses across synapses, the control
of the manufacture and storage of key chemicals in cells,
and the senses of smell and taste. Plants and animals also
use chemical communication. For example, ants lay down a
chemical trail so that other ants can ﬁnd a particular food
supply. Ants also warn their fellow workers of approaching
danger by emitting certain chemicals.

I

The queen bee secretes a chemical that prevents the worker bees from
raising a competitive sovereign.

Molecules convey messages by ﬁtting into appropriate
receptor sites in a very speciﬁc way, which is determined by
their structure. When a molecule occupies a receptor site,
chemical processes are stimulated that produce the appropriate response. Sometimes receptors can be fooled, as in the use
of artiﬁcial sweeteners—-molecules ﬁt the sites on the taste
buds that stimulate a “sweet” response in the brain, but they
are not metabolized in the same way as natural sugars. Similar deception is useful in insect control. If an area is sprayed

however, fail in a few instances. For example, phosphine (PH3), which has a Lewis structure analogous to that of ammonia,

would be predicted to have a molecular structure similar to that for NH3, with bond angles of approximately 107 degrees. However, the bond angles of phosphine are actually
94 degrees. There are ways of explaining this structure, but more rules have to be added
to the model.
This again illustrates the point that simple models are bound to have exceptions. In
introductory chemistry we want to use simple models that ﬁt the majority of cases; we
are willing to accept a few failures rather than complicate the model. The amazing thing
about the VSEPR model is that such a simple model predicts correctly the structures of
so many molecules.

8.13 Molecular Structure: The VSEPR Model

with synthetic female sex attractant molecules, the males of
that species become so confused that mating does not occur.
A semiochemical is a molecule that delivers a message
between members of the same or different species of plant
or animal. There are three groups of these chemical messengers: allomones, kairomones, and pheromones. Each is
of great ecological importance.
An allomone is deﬁned as a chemical that somehow
gives adaptive advantage to the producer. For example,
leaves of the black walnut tree contain a herbicide, juglone,
that appears after the leaves fall to the ground. Juglone is
not toxic to grass or certain grains, but it is effective
against plants such as apple trees that would compete for
the available water and food supplies.
Antibiotics are also allomones, since the microorganisms
produce them to inhibit other species from growing near them.
Many plants produce bad-tasting chemicals to protect
themselves from plant-eating insects and animals. The familiar compound nicotine deters animals from eating the tobacco plant. The millipede sends an unmistakable “back off”
message by squirting a predator with benzaldehyde and
hydrogen cyanide.
Defense is not the only use of allomones, however.
Flowers use scent as a way to attract pollinating insects.
Honeybees, for instance, are guided to alfalfa and ﬂowers
by a series of sweet-scented compounds.
Kairomones are chemical messengers that bring advantageous news to the receiver, and the ﬂoral scents are
kairomones from the honeybees’ viewpoint. Many predators
are guided by kairomones emitted by their food. For example, apple skins exude a chemical that attracts the codling
moth larva. In some cases kairomones help the underdog.

N
H

P

H

H
107˚

H

H
H

NH3

Certain marine mollusks can pick up the “scent” of their
predators, the sea stars, and make their escape.
Pheromones are chemicals that affect receptors of the
same species as the donor. That is, they are speciﬁc within
a species. Releaser pheromones cause an immediate reaction in the receptor, and primer pheromones cause long-term
effects. Examples of releaser pheromones are sex attractants
of insects, generated in some species by the males and in
others by the females. Sex pheromones also have been found
in plants and mammals.
Alarm pheromones are highly volatile compounds (ones
easily changed to a gas) released to warn of danger. Honeybees produce isoamyl acetate (C7H14O2) in their sting glands.
Because of its high volatility, this compound does not linger
after the state of alert is over. Social behavior in insects is characterized by the use of trail pheromones, which are used to indicate a food source. Social insects such as bees, ants, wasps,
and termites use these substances. Since trail pheromones are
less volatile compounds, the indicators persist for some time.
Primer pheromones, which cause long-term behavioral
changes, are harder to isolate and identify. One example,
however, is the “queen substance” produced by queen honeybees. All the eggs in a colony are laid by one queen bee.
If she is removed from the hive or dies, the worker bees are
activated by the absence of the queen substance and begin to
feed royal jelly to bee larvae so as to raise a new queen. The
queen substance also prevents the development of the workers’ ovaries so that only the queen herself can produce eggs.
Many studies of insect pheromones are now under way
in the hope that they will provide a method of controlling
insects that is more efﬁcient and safer than the current
chemical pesticides.

PH3

94˚

379

380

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

Key Terms

For Review

Section 8.1
bond energy
ionic bonding
ionic compound
Coulomb’s law
bond length
covalent bonding
polar covalent bond

Section 8.2
electronegativity

Chemical bonds
䊉 Hold groups of atoms together
䊉 Occur when a group of atoms can lower its total energy by aggregating
䊉 Types of chemical bonds
• Ionic: electrons are transferred to form ions
• Covalent: equal sharing of electrons
• Polar covalent: unequal electron sharing
䊉 Percent ionic character of a bond XOY

Section 8.3
dipolar
dipole moment

Measured dipole moment of X¬ Y
 100%
Calculated dipole moment for X Y

Section 8.4
isoelectronic ions

䊉

Section 8.5
lattice energy

Section 8.8
single bond
double bond
triple bond

Section 8.9
localized electron (LE) model
lone pair
bonding pair

Section 8.10
Lewis structure
duet rule
octet rule

Section 8.12
resonance
resonance structure
formal charge

Section 8.13
molecular structure
valence shell electron-pair repulsion
(VSEPR) model
linear structure
trigonal planar structure
tetrahedral structure
trigonal pyramid
trigonal bipyramid
octahedral structure
square planar structure

䊉

Electronegativity: the relative ability of an atom to attract shared electrons
• The polarity of a bond depends on the electronegativity difference of the
bonded atoms
The spacial arrangement of polar bonds in a molecule determines whether the
molecule has a dipole moment

Ionic bonding
䊉 An ion has a different size than its parent atom
• An anion is larger than its parent ion
• A cation is smaller than its parent atom
䊉 Lattice energy: the change in energy when ions are packed together to form an
ionic solid
Bond energy
䊉 The energy necessary to break a covalent bond
䊉 Increases as the number of shared pairs increases
䊉 Can be used to estimate the enthalpy change for a chemical reaction
Lewis structures
䊉 Show how the valence electron pairs are arranged among the atoms in a molecule
or polyatomic ion
䊉 Stable molecules usually contain atoms that have their valence orbitals ﬁlled
• Leads to a duet rule for hydrogen
• Leads to an octet rule for second-row elements
• The atoms of elements in the third row and beyond can exceed the octet rule
䊉 Several equivalent Lewis structures can be drawn for some molecules, a concept
called resonance
䊉 When several nonequivalent Lewis structures can be drawn for a molecule, formal
charge is often used to choose the most appropriate structure(s)
VSEPR model
䊉 Based on the idea that electron pairs will be arranged around a central atom in a
way that minimizes the electron repulsions
䊉 Can be used to predict the geometric structure of most molecules

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Distinguish between the terms electronegativity versus electron afﬁnity, covalent
bond versus ionic bond, and pure covalent bond versus polar covalent bond.

For Review

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

381

Characterize the types of bonds in terms of electronegativity difference. Energetically,
why do ionic and covalent bonds form?
When an element forms an anion, what happens to the radius? When an element
forms a cation, what happens to the radius? Why? Deﬁne the term isoelectronic.
When comparing sizes of ions, which ion has the largest radius and which ion
has the smallest radius in an isoelectronic series? Why?
Deﬁne the term lattice energy. Why, energetically, do ionic compounds
form? Figure 8.11 illustrates the energy changes involved in the formation
of MgO(s) and NaF(s). Why is the lattice energy of MgO(s) so different
from that of NaF(s)? The magnesium oxide is composed of Mg2 and O2 ions.
Energetically, why does Mg2O2 form and not MgO? Why doesn’t
Mg3O3 form?
Explain how bond energies can be used to estimate H for a reaction. Why is
this an estimate of H? How do the product bond strengths compare to the reactant bond strengths for an exothermic reaction? For an endothermic reaction?
What is the relationship between the number of bonds between two atoms and
bond strength? Bond length?
Give a rationale for the octet rule and the duet rule for H in terms of
orbitals. Give the steps for drawing a Lewis structure for a molecule or ion.
In general, molecules and ions always follow the octet rule unless it is
impossible. The three types of exceptions are molecules/ions with too few
electrons, molecules/ions with an odd number of electrons, and molecules/
ions with too many electrons. Which atoms sometimes have fewer than
8 electrons around them? Give an example. Which atoms sometimes have
more than 8 electrons around them? Give some examples. Why are odd-electron
species generally very reactive and uncommon? Give an example of an oddelectron molecule.
Explain the terms resonance and delocalized electrons. When a substance
exhibits resonance, we say that none of the individual Lewis structures
accurately portrays the bonding in the substance. Why do we draw resonance
structures?
Deﬁne formal charge and explain how to calculate it. What is the purpose of
the formal charge? Organic compounds are composed mostly of carbon and
hydrogen, but also may have oxygen, nitrogen, and/or halogens in the formula.
Formal charge arguments work very well for organic compounds when drawing
the best Lewis structure. How do C, H, N, O, and Cl satisfy the octet rule in organic compounds so as to have a formula charge of zero?
Explain the main postulate of the VSEPR model. List the ﬁve base geometries
(along with bond angles) that most molecules or ions adopt to minimize electron-pair repulsions. Why are bond angles sometimes slightly less than predicted
in actual molecules as compared to what is predicted by the VSEPR model?
Give two requirements that should be satisﬁed for a molecule to be polar.
Explain why CF4 and XeF4 are nonpolar compounds (have no dipole moments)
while SF4 is polar (has a dipole moment). Is CO2 polar? What about COS?
Explain.
Consider the following compounds: CO2, SO2, KrF2, SO3, NF3, IF3, CF4, SF4,
XeF4, PF5, IF5, and SCl6. These 12 compounds are all examples of different
molecular structures. Draw the Lewis structures for each and predict the molecular structure. Predict the bond angles and the polarity of each. (A polar molecule
has a dipole moment, while a nonpolar molecule does not.) See Exercises 89
and 90 for the molecular structures based on the trigonal bipyramid and the octahedral geometries.

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the learning
that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical concepts.

1. Explain the electronegativity trends across a row and down a column of the periodic table. Compare these trends with those of
ionization energies and atomic radii. How are they related?
2. The ionic compound AB is formed. The charges on the ions may
be 1, 1; 2, 2; 3, 3; or even larger. What are the factors that determine the charge for an ion in an ionic compound?
3. Using only the periodic table, predict the most stable ion for Na,
Mg, Al, S, Cl, K, Ca, and Ga. Arrange these from largest to
smallest radius, and explain why the radius varies as it does.
Compare your predictions with Fig. 8.8.
4. The bond energy for a COH bond is about 413 kJ/mol in CH4
but 380 kJ/mol in CHBr3. Although these values are relatively
close in magnitude, they are different. Explain why they are different. Does the fact that the bond energy is lower in CHBr3
make any sense? Why?
5. Consider the following statement: “Because oxygen wants to
have a negative two charge, the second electron afﬁnity is more
negative than the ﬁrst.” Indicate everything that is correct in this
statement. Indicate everything that is incorrect. Correct the incorrect statements and explain.
6. Which has the greater bond lengths: NO2 or NO3? Explain.
7. The following ions are best described with resonance structures.
Draw the resonance structures, and using formal charge arguments, predict the best Lewis structure for each ion.
a. NCO
b. CNO
8. Would you expect the electronegativity of titanium to be the same
in the species Ti, Ti2, Ti3, and Ti4? Explain.
9. The second electron afﬁnity values for both oxygen and sulfur
are unfavorable (endothermic). Explain.
10. What is meant by a chemical bond? Why do atoms form bonds
with each other? Why do some elements exist as molecules in
nature instead of as free atoms?
11. Why are some bonds ionic and some covalent?
12. Does a Lewis structure tell which electrons come from which
atoms? Explain.
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
13. Some plant fertilizer compounds are (NH4)2SO4, Ca3(PO4)2,
K2O, P2O5, and KCl. Which of these compounds contain both
ionic and covalent bonds?
14. Some of the important properties of ionic compounds are as
follows:
i. low electrical conductivity as solids and high conductivity
in solution or when molten

382

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

ii. relatively high melting and boiling points
iii. brittleness
iv. solubility in polar solvents
How does the concept of ionic bonding discussed in this chapter account for these properties?
What is the electronegativity trend? Where does hydrogen ﬁt into
the electronegativity trend for the other elements in the periodic
table?
Give one example of a compound having a linear molecular
structure that has an overall dipole moment (is polar) and one
example that does not have an overall dipole moment (is nonpolar). Do the same for molecules that have trigonal planar and
tetrahedral molecular structures.
When comparing the size of different ions, the general radii trend
discussed in Chapter 7 is generally not very useful. What do you
concentrate on when comparing sizes of ions to each other or when
comparing the size of an ion to its neutral atom?
In general, the higher the charge on the ions in an ionic compound, the more favorable the lattice energy. Why do some
stable ionic compounds have 1 charged ions even though 4,
5, 6, charged ions would have a more favorable lattice
energy?
Combustion reactions of fossil fuels provide most of the energy
needs of the world. Why are combustion reactions of fossil fuels
so exothermic?
Which of the following statements is(are) true? Correct the false
statements.
a. It is impossible to satisfy the octet rule for all atoms in XeF2.
b. Because SF4 exists, then OF4 should also exist because oxygen is in the same family as sulfur.
c. The bond in NO should be stronger than the bond in NO.
d. As predicted from the two Lewis structures for ozone, one
oxygen-oxygen bond is stronger than the other oxygen-oxygen
bond.
Three resonance structures can be drawn for CO2. Which resonance structure is best from a formal charge standpoint?
Which of the following statements is(are) true? Correct the false
statements.
a. The molecules SeS3, SeS2, PCl5, TeCl4, ICl3, and XeCl2 all
exhibit at least one bond angle which is approximately 120°.
b. The bond angle in SO2 should be similar to the bond angle
in CS2 or SCl2.
c. Of the compounds CF4, KrF4, and SeF4, only SeF4 exhibits
an overall dipole moment (is polar).
d. Central atoms in a molecule adopt a geometry of the bonded
atoms and lone pairs about the central atom in order to maximize electron repulsions.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Chemical Bonds and Electronegativity
23. Without using Fig. 8.3, predict the order of increasing electronegativity in each of the following groups of elements.
a. C, N, O
c. Si, Ge, Sn
b. S, Se, Cl
d. Tl, S, Ge

Exercises
24. Without using Fig. 8.3, predict the order of increasing electronegativity in each of the following groups of elements.
a. Na, K, Rb
c. F, Cl, Br
b. B, O, Ga
d. S, O, F
25. Without using Fig. 8.3, predict which bond in each of the following groups will be the most polar.
a. COF, SiOF, GeOF
b. POCl or SOCl
c. SOF, SOCl, SOBr
d. TiOCl, SiOCl, GeOCl
26. Without using Fig. 8.3, predict which bond in each of the following groups will be the most polar.
a. COH, SiOH, SnOH
b. AlOBr, GaOBr, InOBr, TlOBr
c. COO or SiOO
d. OOF or OOCl
27. Repeat Exercises 23 and 25, this time using the
electronegativities of the elements given in Fig.
differences in your answers?
28. Repeat Exercises 24 and 26, this time using the
electronegativities of the elements given in Fig.
differences in your answers?

values for the
8.3. Are there
values for the
8.3. Are there

29. Which of the following incorrectly shows the bond polarity?
Show the correct bond polarity for those that are incorrect.
a. HOF
d. BrOBr


b. ClOI
e. OOP
c. SiOS
30. Indicate the bond polarity (show the partial positive and partial
negative ends) in the following bonds.
a. COO
d. BrOTe
b. POH
e. SeOS
c. HOCl
31. Hydrogen has an electronegativity value between boron and carbon and identical to phosphorus. With this in mind, rank the following bonds in order of decreasing polarity: POH, OOH,
NOH, FOH, COH.
32. Rank the following bonds in order of increasing ionic character:
NOO, CaOO, COF, BrOBr, KOF.

Ions and Ionic Compounds
33. Write electron conﬁgurations for the most stable ion formed by
each of the elements Fr, Be, P, Cl, and Se (when in stable ionic
compounds).
34. Write electron conﬁgurations for
a. the cations Mg2, K, and Al3.
b. the anions N3, O2, F, and Te2.
35. Which of the following ions have noble gas electron conﬁgurations?
a. Fe2, Fe3, Sc3, Co3
b. Tl, Te2, Cr3
c. Pu4, Ce4, Ti4
d. Ba2, Pt2, Mn2
36. What noble gas has the same election conﬁguration as each of
the ions in the following compounds?
a. cesium sulﬁde
b. strontium ﬂuoride

383

c. calcium nitride
d. aluminum bromide
37. Give three ions that are isoelectronic with xenon. Place these
ions in order of increasing size.
38. Consider the ions Sc3, Cl, K, Ca2, and S2. Match these ions
to the following pictures that represent the relative sizes of the ions.

39. For each of the following groups, place the atoms and/or ions in
order of decreasing size.
a. Cu, Cu, Cu2
b. Ni2, Pd2, Pt2
c. O, O, O2
d. La3, Eu3, Gd3, Yb3
e. Te2, I, Cs, Ba2, La3
40. For each of the following groups, place the atoms and/or ions in
order of decreasing size.
a. V, V2, V3, V5
b. Na, K, Rb, Cs
c. Te2, I, Cs, Ba2
d. P, P, P2, P3
e. O2, S2, Se2, Te2
41. Predict the empirical formulas of the ionic compounds formed
from the following pairs of elements. Name each compound.
a. Al and S
c. Mg and Cl
b. K and N
d. Cs and Br
42. Predict the empirical formulas of the ionic compounds formed
from the following pairs of elements. Name each compound.
a. Ga and I
c. Sr and F
b. Na and O
d. Ca and P
43. Which compound in each of the following pairs of ionic substances has the most exothermic lattice energy? Justify your
answers.
a. NaCl, KCl
b. LiF, LiCl
c. Mg(OH)2, MgO
d. Fe(OH)2, Fe(OH)3
e. NaCl, Na2O
f. MgO, BaS
44. Which compound in each of the following pairs of ionic substances has the most exothermic lattice energy? Justify your
answers.
a. LiF, CsF
b. NaBr, NaI
c. BaCl2, BaO
d. Na2SO4, CaSO4
e. KF, K2O
f. Li2O, Na2S
45. Use the following data to estimate Hf for potassium chloride.
K1s2  12 Cl2 1g2 ¡ KCl1s2

384

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
690.
419
349
239
64

Lattice energy
Ionization energy for K
Electron afﬁnity of Cl
Bond energy of Cl2
Enthalpy of sublimation for K

kJ/mol
kJ/mol
kJ/mol
kJ/mol
kJ/mol

46. Use the following data to estimate Hf for magnesium ﬂuoride.
Mg1s2  F2 1g2 ¡ MgF2 1s2
Lattice energy
First ionization energy of Mg
Second ionization energy of Mg
Electron afﬁnity of F
Bond energy of F2
Enthalpy of sublimation of Mg

3916 kJ/mol
735 kJ/mol
1445 kJ/mol
328 kJ/mol
154 kJ/mol
150. kJ/mol

47. Consider the following energy changes:
H (kJ/mol)




Mg(g) S Mg (g)  e
Mg(g) S Mg2(g)  e
O(g)  e S O(g)
O(g)  e S O2(g)

735
1445
141
878

51. Rationalize the following lattice energy values:
Lattice Energy
(kJ/mol)

Compound

2862
2130
2721
2095

CaSe
Na2Se
CaTe
Na2Te

52. The lattice energies of FeCl3, FeCl2, and Fe2O3 are (in no particular order) 2631, 5359, and 14,774 kJ/mol. Match the
appropriate formula to each lattice energy. Explain.

Bond Energies
53. Use bond energy values (Table 8.4) to estimate H for each of
the following reactions in the gas phase.
a. H2  Cl2 S 2HCl
b. N ‚ N  3H2 S 2NH3
54. Use bond energy values (Table 8.4) to estimate H for each of
the following reactions.
a.
H H
H

C

N(g)  2H2(g)

b. H

49. LiI(s) has a heat of formation of 272 kJ/mol and a lattice energy of 753 kJ/mol. The ionization energy of Li(g) is 520.
kJ/mol, the bond energy of I2(g) is 151 kJ/mol, and the electron
afﬁnity of I(g) is 295 kJ/mol. Use these data to determine the
heat of sublimation of Li(s).
50. Use the following data to estimate H for the reaction S(g) 
e → S2(g). Include an estimate of uncertainty.

H

C

N(g)

H

H

N

N(g)  4HF(g)

H
N

Magnesium oxide exists as Mg2O2 and not as MgO. Explain.
48. Compare the electron afﬁnity of ﬂuorine to the ionization energy
of sodium. Is the process of an electron being “pulled” from the
sodium atom to the ﬂuorine atom exothermic or endothermic?
Why is NaF a stable compound? Is the overall formation of NaF
endothermic or exothermic? How can this be?

H

N

(l)  2F2(g)
H

55. Use bond energies (Table 8.4) to predict H for the isomerization of methyl isocyanide to acetonitrile:
CH3N ‚ C1g2 ¡ CH3C ‚ N1g2
56. Acetic acid is responsible for the sour taste of vinegar. It can be
manufactured using the following reaction:

CH3OH(g)  CqO(g)

O
B
CH3C OOH(l)

Use tabulated values of bond energies (Table 8.4) to estimate H
for this reaction.
57. Use bond energies to predict H for the combustion of ethanol:

Hf
Na2S
K2S
Rb2S
Cs2S

365
381
361
360

Lattice
Energy

I.E. of M

Hsub
of M

2203
2052
1949
1850

495
419
409
382

109
90
82
78

C2H5OH(l)  3O2(g) n 2CO2(g)  3H2O(g)
58. Use bond energies to estimate
mole of acetylene:

H for the combustion for one

C2H2 1g2  52 O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  H2O1g2
59. Use bond energies to estimate

H for the following reaction:

H2O2 1aq2  CH3OH1aq2 ¡ H2CO1aq2  2H2O1l 2
S1s2 ¡ S1g2

S1g2  e ¡ S 1g2

¢H  277 kJ/mol
¢H  200 kJ/mol

Assume that all values are known to 1 kJ/mol.

60. The space shuttle orbiter utilizes the oxidation of methyl hydrazine
by dinitrogen tetroxide for propulsion:
5N2O4 1l2  4N2H3CH3 1l2 ¡ 12H2O1g2  9N2 1g2  4CO2 1g2

Exercises
Use bond energies to estimate
tures for the reactants are:
O

M

D
O

O

NO N

J
G

H for this reaction. The strucH


O

H
E
H
NO N
D
G
H
H3C

61. Consider the following reaction:
H
H

C

C

H
(g)  F2(g)
H

H

F

F

C

C

H

H

H(g)

H  549 kJ

Estimate the carbon–ﬂuorine bond energy given that the COC
bond energy is 347 kJ/mol, the CPC bond energy is 614 kJ/mol,
and the FOF bond energy is 154 kJ/mol.
62. Consider the following reaction:
A2  B2 ¡ 2AB

¢H  285 kJ

The bond energy for A2 is one-half the amount of the AB bond
energy. The bond energy of B2  432 kJ/mol. What is the bond
energy of A2?
63. Compare your answers from parts a and b of Exercise 53 with
H values calculated for each reaction using standard enthalpies
of formation in Appendix 4. Do enthalpy changes calculated from
bond energies give a reasonable estimate of the actual values?
64. Compare your answer from Exercise 56 to the H value calculated from standard enthalpies of formation in Appendix 4.
Explain any discrepancies.
65. The standard enthalpies of formation for S(g), F(g), SF4(g), and
SF6(g) are 278.8, 79.0, 775, and 1209 kJ/mol, respectively.
a. Use these data to estimate the energy of an SOF bond.
b. Compare your calculated values to the value given in Table
8.4. What conclusions can you draw?
c. Why are the H f values for S(g) and F(g) not equal to zero,
since sulfur and ﬂuorine are elements?
66. Use the following standard enthalpies of formation to estimate
the NOH bond energy in ammonia: N(g), 472.7 kJ/mol; H(g),
216.0 kJ/mol; NH3(g), 46.1 kJ/mol. Compare your value to the
one in Table 8.4.

Lewis Structures and Resonance
67. Write Lewis structures that obey the octet rule for each of the
following.
a. HCN
d. NH4
g. CO2
b. PH3
e. H2CO
h. O2
c. CHCl3
f. SeF2
i. HBr
Except for HCN and H2CO, the ﬁrst atom listed is the central
atom. For HCN and H2CO, carbon is the central atom.
68. Write Lewis structures that obey the octet rule for each of the
following molecules and ions. (In each case the ﬁrst atom listed
is the central atom.)
a. POCl3, SO42, XeO4, PO43, ClO4
b. NF3, SO32, PO33, ClO3

385

c. ClO2, SCl2, PCl2
d. Considering your answers to parts a, b, and c, what conclusions can you draw concerning the structures of species containing the same number of atoms and the same number of
valence electrons?
69. One type of exception to the octet rule are compounds with central atoms having fewer than eight electrons around them. BeH2
and BH3 are examples of this type of exception. Draw the Lewis
structures for BeH2 and BH3.
70. Lewis structures can be used to understand why some molecules
react in certain ways. Write the Lewis structures for the reactants and products in the reactions described below.
a. Nitrogen dioxide dimerizes to produce dinitrogen tetroxide.
b. Boron trihydride accepts a pair of electrons from ammonia,
forming BH3NH3.
Give a possible explanation for why these two reactions occur.
71. The most common type of exception to the octet rule are compounds or ions with central atoms having more than eight electrons around them. PF5, SF4, ClF3 and Br3 are examples of this
type of exception. Draw the Lewis structure for these compounds
or ions. Which elements, when they have to, can have more than
eight electrons around them? How is this rationalized?
72. SF6, ClF5, and XeF4 are three compounds whose central atoms
do not follow the octet rule. Draw Lewis structures for these
compounds.
73. Write Lewis structures for the following. Show all resonance
structures where applicable.
a. NO2, NO3, N2O4 (N2O4 exists as O2NONO2.)
b. OCN, SCN, N3 (Carbon is the central atom in OCN and
SCN.)
74. Some of the important pollutants in the atmosphere are ozone (O3),
sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide. Write Lewis structures for these
three molecules. Show all resonance structures where applicable.
75. Benzene (C6H6) consists of a six-membered ring of carbon atoms
with one hydrogen bonded to each carbon. Write Lewis structures for benzene, including resonance structures.
76. Borazine (B3N3H6) has often been called “inorganic” benzene.
Write Lewis structures for borazine. Borazine contains a sixmembered ring of alternating boron and nitrogen atoms with one
hydrogen bonded to each boron and nitrogen.
77. An important observation supporting the concept of resonance
in the localized electron model was that there are only three
different structures of dichlorobenzene (C6H4Cl2). How does this
fact support the concept of resonance (see Exercise 75)?
78. Consider the following bond lengths:
C¬O 143 pm

C “O 123 pm

C‚O 109 pm

2

In the CO3 ion, all three COO bonds have identical bond
lengths of 136 pm. Why?
79. Place the species below in order of shortest to longest nitrogen–
nitrogen bond.
N2

N2F4

N2F2

(N2F4 exists as F2NONF2, and N2F2 exists as FNONF.)

386

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts

80. Order the following species with respect to carbon–oxygen bond
length (longest to shortest).
CO,

CO2,

CO32,

CH3OH

What is the order from the weakest to the strongest carbon–
oxygen bond? (CH3OH exists as H3COOH.)

A

90
180

B

B

83. Write the Lewis structure for O2F2 (O2F2 exists as FOOOOOF).
Assign oxidation states and formal charges to the atoms in O2F2.
This compound is a vigorous and potent oxidizing and ﬂuorinating agent. Are oxidation states or formal charges more useful in accounting for these properties of O2F2?
84. Oxidation of the cyanide ion produces the stable cyanate ion,
OCN. The fulminate ion, CNO, on the other hand, is very unstable. Fulminate salts explode when struck; Hg(CNO)2 is used
in blasting caps. Write the Lewis structures and assign formal
charges for the cyanate and fulminate ions. Why is the fulminate
ion so unstable? (C is the central atom in OCN and N is the
central atom in CNO.)
85. When molten sulfur reacts with chlorine gas, a vile-smelling
orange liquid forms that has an empirical formula of SCl. The
structure of this compound has a formal charge of zero on all
elements in the compound. Draw the Lewis structure for the vilesmelling orange liquid.
86. Nitrous oxide (N2O) has three possible Lewis structures:

Given the following bond lengths,
167 pm
120 pm
110 pm

NPO
NOO

115 pm
147 pm

rationalize the observations that the NON bond length in N2O
is 112 pm and that the NOO bond length is 119 pm. Assign formal charges to the resonance structures for N2O. Can you eliminate any of the resonance structures on the basis of formal
charges? Is this consistent with observation?

Molecular Structure and Polarity
87. Predict the molecular structure and bond angles for each molecule or ion in Exercises 67 and 73.
88. Predict the molecular structure and bond angles for each molecule or ion in Exercises 68 and 74.

A

B

120

90

A

A

Linear

81. Write Lewis structures that obey the octet rule for the following
species. Assign the formal charge for each central atom.
a. POCl3
e. SO2Cl2
b. SO42
f. XeO4
c. ClO4
g. ClO3
3
d. PO4
h. NO43
82 Write Lewis structures for the species in Exercise 81 that involve
minimum formal charges.

90
A A

A

A

Formal Charge

NON
NPN
NqN

89. There are several molecular structures based on the trigonal
bipyramid geometry (see Table 8.6). Three such structures are

90A

T-shaped

See-saw

Which of the compounds in Exercises 71 and 72 have these molecular structures?
90. Two variations of the octahedral geometry (see Table 8.6) are
illustrated below.
A

A
B

A

90

90
A A A

B

90

A

Square planar

A

90

90

A

Square pyramid

Which of the compounds in Exercises 71 and 72 have these molecular structures?
91. Predict the molecular structure (including bond angles) for each
of the following.
a. SeO3
b. SeO2
92. Predict the molecular structure (including bond angles) for each
of the following.
a. PCl3
b. SCl2
c. SiF4
93. Predict the molecular structure (including bond angles) for each
of the following. (See Exercises 89 and 90.)
a. XeCl2
b. ICl3
c. TeF4
d. PCl5
94. Predict the molecular structure (including bond angles) for each
of the following. (See Exercises 89 and 90.)
a. ICl5
b. XeCl4
c. SeCl6
95. Which of the molecules in Exercise 91 have dipole moments (are
polar)?
96. Which of the molecules in Exercise 92 have dipole moments (are
polar)?
97. Which of the molecules in Exercise 93 have dipole moments (are
polar)?
98. Which of the molecules in Exercise 94 have dipole moments (are
polar)?
99. Write Lewis structures and predict the molecular structures of
the following. (See Exercises 89 and 90.)
a. OCl2, KrF2, BeH2, SO2
b. SO3, NF3, IF3
c. CF4, SeF4, KrF4
d. IF5, AsF5
Which of these compounds are polar?

Challenge Problems

387

100. Write Lewis structures and predict whether each of the following is polar or nonpolar.
a. HOCN (exists as HOOCN)
b. COS
c. XeF2
d. CF2Cl2
e. SeF6
f. H2CO (C is the central atom.)

108. Write Lewis structures for CO32, HCO3, and H2CO3. When
acid is added to an aqueous solution containing carbonate or
bicarbonate ions, carbon dioxide gas is formed. We generally say
that carbonic acid (H2CO3) is unstable. Use bond energies to
estimate H for the reaction (in the gas phase)

101. Consider the following Lewis structure where E is an unknown
element:

109.

H2CO3 ¡ CO2  H2O

   –
ðO
 OE O O
ð

A

ðO
ð

What are some possible identities for element E? Predict the
molecular structure (including bond angles) for this ion.
102. Consider the following Lewis structure where E is an unknown
element:
½ k 2–
  DO
F O
E
ð
Gš
Fð


110.

111.

112.

What are some possible identities for element E? Predict the
molecular structure (including bond angles) for this ion. (See
Exercises 89 and 90.)

113.

103. The molecules BF3, CF4, CO2, PF5, and SF6 are all nonpolar,
even though they all contain polar bonds. Why?
104. Two different compounds have the formula XeF2Cl2. Write Lewis
structures for these two compounds, and describe how measurement of dipole moments might be used to distinguish between them.

114.

Additional Exercises
105. Arrange the following in order of increasing radius and increasing ionization energy.
a. N, N, N
b. Se, Se, Cl, Cl
c. Br, Rb, Sr2
106. For each of the following, write an equation that corresponds to
the energy given.
a. lattice energy of NaCl
b. lattice energy of NH4Br
c. lattice energy of MgS
d. OPO double bond energy beginning with O2(g) as a reactant
107. Use bond energies (Table 8.4), values of electron afﬁnities (Table
7.7), and the ionization energy of hydrogen (1312 kJ/mol) to estimate H for each of the following reactions.
a. HF1g2 S H 1g2  F 1g2
b. HCl1g2 S H 1g2  Cl 1g2
c. HI1g2 S H 1g2  I 1g2
d. H2O1g2 S H  1g2  OH 1g2
(Electron afﬁnity of OH(g)  180. kJ/mol.)

115.

Specify a possible cause for the instability of carbonic acid.
Which member of the following pairs would you expect to be
more energetically stable? Justify each choice.
a. NaBr or NaBr2
b. ClO4 or ClO4
c. SO4 or XeO4
d. OF4 or SeF4
What do each of the following sets of compounds/ions have in
common with each other?
a. SO3, NO3, CO32
b. O3, SO2, NO2
What do each of the following sets of compounds/ions have in
common with each other? See your Lewis structures for Exercises 91 through 94.
a. XeCl4, XeCl2
b. ICl5, TeF4, ICl3, PCl3, SCl2, SeO2
Although both Br3 and I3 ions are known, the F3 ion has not
been observed. Explain.
Refer back to Exercises 81 and 82. Would you make the same
prediction for the molecular structure for each case using the
Lewis structure obtained in Exercise 81 as compared with the
one obtained in Exercise 82?
Which of the following molecules have dipole moments? For the
molecules that are polar, indicate the polarity of each bond and
the direction of the net dipole moment of the molecule.
a. CH2Cl2, CHCl3, CCl4
b. CO2, N2O
c. PH3, NH3
The structure of TeF5 is


F
F

F
79°
Te

F

F

Draw a complete Lewis structure for TeF5, and explain the distortion from the ideal square pyramidal structure. (See Exercise 90.)

Challenge Problems
116. An alternative deﬁnition of electronegativity is
Electronegativity  constant 1I.E.  E.A.2
where I.E. is the ionization energy and E.A. is the electron
afﬁnity using the sign conventions of this book. Use data in

388

Chapter Eight Bonding: General Concepts
Chapter 7 to calculate the (I.E.  E.A.) term for F, Cl, Br, and
I. Do these values show the same trend as the electronegativity
values given in this chapter? The ﬁrst ionization energies of the
halogens are 1678, 1255, 1138, and 1007 kJ/mol, respectively.
(Hint: Choose a constant so that the electronegativity of ﬂuorine
equals 4.0. Using this constant, calculate relative electronegativities for the other halogens and compare to values given in the
text.)

117. Calculate the standard heat of formation of the compound
ICl(g) at 25C, and show your work. (Hint: Use Table 8.4 and
Appendix 4.)
118. Given the following information:
Heat of sublimation of Li(s)  166 kJ/mol
Bond energy of HCl  427 kJ/mol
Ionization energy of Li(g)  520. kJ/mol
Electron afﬁnity of Cl(g)  349 kJ/mol
Lattice energy of LiCl(s)  829 kJ/mol
Bond energy of H2  432 kJ/mol

b. 4CH2“CHCH3  6NO

700°C
¡
Ag

4CH2“CHCN  6H2O  N2
The nitrogen–oxygen bond energy in nitric oxide (NO) is 630.
kJ/mol.
c. 2CH2“CHCH3  2NH3  3O2

Catalyst
¡
425510°C

2CH2“CHCN  6H2O
d. Is the elevated temperature noted in parts b and c needed to
provide energy to endothermic reactions?
123. The compound hexaazaisowurtzitane is the highest-energy explosive known (C & E News, Jan. 17, 1994, p. 26). The compound,
also known as CL-20, was ﬁrst synthesized in 1987. The method
of synthesis and detailed performance data are still classiﬁed because of CL-20’s potential military application in rocket boosters
and in warheads of “smart” weapons. The structure of CL-20 is
O2N
O2N

N
N

N
N

NO2
NO2

Calculate the net change in energy for the following reaction:
2Li1s2  2HCl1g2 ¡ 2LiCl1s2  H2 1g2
119. Use data in this chapter (and Chapter 7) to discuss why MgO is
an ionic compound but CO is not an ionic compound.
120. Think of forming an ionic compound as three steps (this is a
simpliﬁcation, as with all models): (1) removing an electron from
the metal; (2) adding an electron to the nonmetal; and (3) allowing the metal cation and nonmetal anion to come together.
a. What is the sign of the energy change for each of these three
processes?
b. In general, what is the sign of the sum of the ﬁrst two
processes? Use examples to support your answer.
c. What must be the sign of the sum of the three processes?
d. Given your answer to part c, why do ionic bonds occur?
e. Given your above explanations, why is NaCl stable but
not Na2Cl? NaCl2? What about MgO compared to MgO2?
Mg2O?
121. The compound NF3 is quite stable, but NCl3 is very unstable
(NCl3 was ﬁrst synthesized in 1811 by P. L. Dulong, who lost
three ﬁngers and an eye studying its properties). The compounds
NBr3 and Nl3 are unknown, although the explosive compound
Nl3  NH3 is known. Account for the instability of these halides
of nitrogen.

N

N

O2N

NO2
CL-20

In such shorthand structures, each point where lines meet represents a carbon atom. In addition, the hydrogens attached to the
carbon atoms are omitted; each of the six carbon atoms has one
hydrogen atom attached. Finally, assume that the two O atoms
in the NO2 groups are attached to N with one single bond and
one double bond.
Three possible reactions for the explosive decomposition of
CL-20 are
3
i. C6H6N12O12 1s2 S 6CO1g2  6N2 1g2  3H2O1g2  O2 1g2
2
ii. C6H6N12O12 1s2 S 3CO1g2  3CO2 1g2  6N2 1g2  3H2O1g2
iii. C6H6N12O12 1s2 S 6CO2 1g2  6N2 1g2  3H2 1g2
a. Use bond energies to estimate H for these three reactions.
b. Which of the above reactions releases the largest amount of
energy per kilogram of CL-20?
124. Many times extra stability is characteristic of a molecule or ion in
which resonance is possible. How could this be used to explain
the acidities of the following compounds? (The acidic hydrogen
is marked by an asterisk.) Part c shows resonance in the C6H5 ring.

122. Three processes that have been used for the industrial manufacture of acrylonitrile (CH2CHCN), an important chemical used in
the manufacture of plastics, synthetic rubber, and ﬁbers, are
shown below. Use bond energy values (Table 8.4) to estimate
H for each of the reactions.
a.

125. Peroxacetyl nitrate, or PAN, is present in photochemical smog.
Draw Lewis structures (including resonance forms) for PAN. The
skeletal arrangement is
H O
O
A A
D
H O C O C O O O O ON
G
A
O
H

Marathon Problem
126. Draw a Lewis structure for the N,N-dimethylformamide molecule. The skeletal structure is

389

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

Various types of evidence lead to the conclusion that there is
some double bond character to the CON bond. Draw one or
more resonance structures that support this observation.
127. Predict the molecular structure for each of the following. (See
Exercises 89 and 90.)
a. BrFI2
b. XeO2F2
c. TeF2Cl3
For each formula there are at least two different structures that
can be drawn using the same central atom. Draw all possible
structures for each formula.
128. The study of carbon-containing compounds and their properties
is called organic chemistry. Besides carbon atoms, organic compounds also can contain hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen atoms
(as well as other types of atoms). A common trait of simple organic compounds is to have Lewis structures where all atoms
have a formal charge of zero. Consider the following incomplete
Lewis structure for an organic compound called histidine (an
amino acid, which is the building block of all proteins found in
our bodies):
C

N

C

N

H

C

H

N

C

C

H

H

O

H

2

H

C H
H
1

O

H

Draw a complete Lewis structure for histidine in which all atoms
have a formal charge of zero. What should be the approximate
bond angles about the carbon atom labeled 1 and the nitrogen
atom labeled 2?
129. Using bond energies, estimate H for the following reaction:
O
B
CH3CH2OH(aq)  HOCCH3(aq)

O
B
CH3CH2OCCH3(aq)  H2O(l)

130. Consider the following computer-generated model of caffeine.
H
O
N
C

Draw a Lewis structure for caffeine in which all atoms have a
formal charge of zero.

131. A compound, XF5, is 42.81% ﬂuorine by mass. Identify the element X. What is the molecular structure of XF5?
132. A polyatomic ion is composed of C, N, and an unknown element X. The skeletal Lewis structure of this polyatomic ion is
[XOCON]. The ion X2 has an electron conﬁguration of
[Ar]4s23d104p6. What is element X? Knowing the identity of X,
complete the Lewis structure of the polyatomic ion, including
all important resonance structures.
133. Identify the following elements based on their electron conﬁgurations and rank them in order of increasing electronegativity:
[Ar]4s13d5; [Ne]3s23p3; [Ar]4s23d104p3; [Ne]3s23p5.

Marathon Problem
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

134. Identify the ﬁve compounds of H, N, and O described below.
For each compound, write a Lewis structure that is consistent
with the information given.
a. All the compounds are electrolytes, although not all of them
are strong electrolytes. Compounds C and D are ionic and
compound B is covalent.
b. Nitrogen occurs in its highest possible oxidation state in compounds A and C; nitrogen occurs in its lowest possible oxidation state in compounds C, D, and E. The formal charge
on both nitrogens in compound C is 1; the formal charge
on the only nitrogen in compound B is 0.
c. Compounds A and E exist in solution. Both solutions give off
gases. Commercially available concentrated solutions of compound A are normally 16 M. The commercial, concentrated
solution of compound E is 15 M.
d. Commercial solutions of compound E are labeled with a
misnomer that implies that a binary, gaseous compound of
nitrogen and hydrogen has reacted with water to produce
ammonium ions and hydroxide ions. Actually, this reaction
occurs to only a slight extent.
e. Compound D is 43.7% N and 50.0% O by mass. If compound
D were a gas at STP, it would have a density of 2.86 g/L.
f. A formula unit of compound C has one more oxygen than
a formula unit of compound D. Compounds C and A have
one ion in common when compound A is acting as a strong
electrolyte.
g. Solutions of compound C are weakly acidic; solutions of compound A are strongly acidic; solutions of compounds B and
E are basic. The titration of 0.726 g of compound B requires
21.98 mL of 1.000 M HCl for complete neutralization.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl 7e.

9 Covalent Bonding: Orbitals
Contents
9.1 Hybridization and the
Localized Electron Model
• sp3 Hybridization
• sp2 Hybridization
• sp Hybridization
• dsp3 Hybridization
• d2sp3 Hybridization
• The Localized Electron Model:
A Summary
9.2 The Molecular Orbital Model
• Bond Order
9.3 Bonding in Homonuclear
Diatomic Molecules
• Paramagnetism
9.4 Bonding in Heteronuclear
Diatomic Molecules
9.5 Combining the Localized
Electron and Molecular
Orbital Models

A close-up of soap bubbles reveals their geometric shapes.

390

I

n Chapter 8 we discussed the fundamental concepts of bonding and introduced the
most widely used simple model for covalent bonding: the localized electron model.
We saw the usefulness of a bonding model as a means for systematizing chemistry by
allowing us to look at molecules in terms of individual bonds. We also saw that molecular structure can be predicted by minimizing electron-pair repulsions. In this chapter
we will examine bonding models in more detail, particularly focusing on the role of
orbitals.

9.1 Hybridization and the Localized Electron Model
As we saw in Chapter 8, the localized electron model views a molecule as a collection of
atoms bound together by sharing electrons between their atomic orbitals. The arrangement
of valence electrons is represented by the Lewis structure (or structures, where resonance
occurs), and the molecular geometry can be predicted from the VSEPR model. In this
section we will describe the atomic orbitals used to share electrons and hence to form
the bonds.

sp3 Hybridization
Visualization: Hybridization: sp

3

The valence orbitals are the orbitals
associated with the highest principal
quantum level that contains electrons on
a given atom.

Let us reconsider the bonding in methane, which has the Lewis structure and molecular
geometry shown in Fig. 9.1. In general, we assume that bonding involves only the valence
orbitals. This means that the hydrogen atoms in methane use 1s orbitals. The valence orbitals of a carbon atom are the 2s and 2p orbitals shown in Fig. 9.2. In thinking about
how carbon can use these orbitals to bond to the hydrogen atoms, we can see two related
problems:
1. Using the 2p and 2s atomic orbitals will lead to two different types of COH bonds:
(a) those from the overlap of a 2p orbital of carbon and a 1s orbital of hydrogen (there
will be three of these) and (b) those from the overlap of a 2s orbital of carbon and a
1s orbital of hydrogen (there will be one of these). This is a problem because methane
is known to have four identical COH bonds.
2. Since the carbon 2p orbitals are mutually perpendicular, we might expect the three
COH bonds formed with these orbitals to be oriented at 90-degree angles:

Hybridization is a modiﬁcation of the
localized electron model to account for
the observation that atoms often seem to
use special atomic orbitals in forming
molecules.
sp 3 hybridization gives a tetrahedral set
of orbitals.

However, the methane molecule is known by experiment to be tetrahedral with bond
angles of 109.5 degrees.
This analysis leads to one of two conclusions: Either the simple localized electron
model is wrong or carbon adopts a set of atomic orbitals other than its “native” 2s and
2p orbitals to bond to the hydrogen atoms in forming the methane molecule. The second conclusion seems more reasonable. The 2s and 2p orbitals present on an isolated
carbon atom may not be the best set of orbitals for bonding; a new set of atomic

391

392

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

H

H

H

C

H

C

H

H
H

H

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 9.1
(a) The Lewis structure of the methane
molecule. (b) The tetrahedral molecular
geometry of the methane molecule.

z

z

x

x

y

y

s
z

py
z

x

x

y

y

px

pz

FIGURE 9.2
The valence orbitals on a free carbon atom:
2s, 2px, 2py, and 2pz.

orbitals might better serve the carbon atom in forming molecules. To account for the
known structure of methane, it makes sense to assume that the carbon atom has four
equivalent atomic orbitals, arranged tetrahedrally. In fact, such a set of orbitals can be
obtained quite readily by combining the carbon 2s and 2p orbitals, as shown schematically in Fig. 9.3. This mixing of the native atomic orbitals to form special orbitals for
bonding is called hybridization. The four new orbitals are called sp3 orbitals because
they are formed from one 2s and three 2p orbitals (s1p3). We say that the carbon atom
undergoes sp3 hybridization or is sp3 hybridized. The four sp3 orbitals are identical
in shape, each one having a large lobe and a small lobe (see Fig. 9.4). The four orbitals are oriented in space so that the large lobes form a tetrahedral arrangement, as
shown in Fig. 9.3.
The hybridization of the carbon 2s and 2p orbitals also can be represented by an orbital energy-level diagram, as shown in Fig. 9.5. Note that electrons have been omitted
because we do not need to be concerned with the electron arrangements on the individual atoms—it is the total number of electrons and the arrangement of these electrons in
the molecule that are important. We are assuming that carbon’s atomic orbitals are
rearranged to accommodate the best electron arrangement for the molecule as a whole.
The new sp3 atomic orbitals on carbon are used to share electron pairs with the 1s orbitals
from the four hydrogen atoms, as shown in Fig. 9.6 on page 393.
At this point let’s summarize the bonding in the methane molecule. The experimentally known structure of this molecule can be explained if we assume that the carbon atom
adopts a special set of atomic orbitals. These new orbitals are obtained by combining the
2s and the three 2p orbitals of the carbon atom to produce four identically shaped orbitals
that are oriented toward the corners of a tetrahedron and are used to bond to the hydrogen atoms. Thus the four sp3 orbitals on carbon in methane are postulated to account for
its known structure.
Remember this principle: Whenever a set of equivalent tetrahedral atomic orbitals is
required by an atom, this model assumes that the atom adopts a set of sp3 orbitals; the
atom becomes sp3 hybridized.
It is really not surprising that an atom in a molecule might adopt a different set of
atomic orbitals (called hybrid orbitals) from those it has in the free state. It does not
seem unreasonable that to achieve minimum energy, an atom uses one set of atomic orbitals in the free state and a different set in a molecule. This is consistent with the idea
that a molecule is more than simply a sum of its parts. What the atoms in a molecule were

z

z

z

x

x

x

y

y

px
z

s
z

y

y

py

Hybridization

y

pz

gives a
tetrahedral
arrangement

y

sp 3
sp 3

z

x
y

sp 3

x

z

x

x

z

x

sp 3

y

FIGURE 9.3
The “native” 2s and three 2p atomic orbitals characteristic of a free carbon atom are combined to form a new set of four sp3 orbitals. The small
lobes of the orbitals are usually omitted from diagrams for clarity.

9.1 Hybridization and the Localized Electron Model

2p

393

Hybridization
sp 3

E

2s
Orbitals in a
free C atom

Orbitals in C in
the CH 4 molecule

FIGURE 9.5
An energy-level diagram showing the formation of four sp3 orbitals.

FIGURE 9.4
Cross section of an sp3 orbital. This shows a
“slice” of the electron density of the sp3
orbitals illustrated in the center diagram of
Fig. 9.3.
(Generated from a program by Robert Allendoerfer
on Project SERAPHIM disk PC2402; printed with
permission.)

Sample Exercise 9.1

like before the molecule was formed is not as important as how the electrons are best
arranged in the molecule. Therefore, this model assumes that the individual atoms respond
as needed to achieve the minimum energy for the molecule.

The Localized Electron Model I
Describe the bonding in the ammonia molecule using the localized electron model.

H1s

Solution
sp 3

A complete description of the bonding involves three steps:
sp 3

C

H1s

H1s

sp 3

1. Writing the Lewis structure
2. Determining the arrangement of electron pairs using the VSEPR model
3. Determining the hybrid atomic orbitals needed to describe the bonding in the molecule
The Lewis structure for NH3 is

sp 3
H1s

FIGURE 9.6
The tetrahedral set of four sp3 orbitals of
the carbon atom are used to share electron
pairs with the four 1s orbitals of the
hydrogen atoms to form the four equivalent
COH bonds. This accounts for the known
tetrahedral structure of the CH4 molecule.

The four electron pairs around the nitrogen atom require a tetrahedral arrangement to minimize repulsions. We have seen that a tetrahedral set of sp3 hybrid orbitals is obtained by
combining the 2s and three 2p orbitals. In the NH3 molecule three of the sp3 orbitals are
used to form bonds to the three hydrogen atoms, and the fourth sp3 orbital holds the lone
pair, as shown in Fig. 9.7.
See Exercise 9.15.

lone pair

sp2 Hybridization

sp 3
sp 3
N

H1s

H1s

Ethylene (C2H4) is an important starting material in the manufacture of plastics. The C2H4
molecule has 12 valence electrons and the following Lewis structure:

sp 3
sp 3
H1s

FIGURE 9.7
The nitrogen atom in ammonia is sp3
hybridized.

We saw in Chapter 8 that a double bond acts as one effective pair, so in the ethylene molecule each carbon is surrounded by three effective pairs. This requires a trigonal planar
arrangement with bond angles of 120 degrees. What orbitals do the carbon atoms in this
molecule employ? The molecular geometry requires a set of orbitals in one plane at angles

394

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

z

z

z

x

x
y

y

z

px

s
z

x
Hybridization

y

z

x
gives a
trigonal planar
arrangement

y

x

z
120°
x

x

y

y

y

py

FIGURE 9.8
The hybridization of the s, px , and py atomic orbitals results in the formation of three sp2 orbitals centered in the xy plane. The large lobes of
the orbitals lie in the plane at angles of 120 degrees and point toward the corners of a triangle.

A double bond acts as one effective
electron pair.

sp 2 hybridization gives a trigonal planar
arrangement of atomic orbitals.
Note in Fig. 9.10 and the ﬁgures that
follow that the orbital lobes are artiﬁcially
narrowed to more clearly show their
relative orientations.

of 120 degrees. Since the 2s and 2p valence orbitals of carbon do not have the required
arrangement, we need a set of hybrid orbitals.
The sp3 orbitals we have just considered will not work because they are at angles of
109.5 degrees rather than the required 120 degrees. In ethylene the carbon atom must hybridize in a different manner. A set of three orbitals arranged at 120-degree angles in the
same plane can be obtained by combining one s orbital and two p orbitals, as shown in
Fig. 9.8. The orbital energy-level diagram for this arrangement is shown in Fig. 9.9. Since
one 2s and two 2p orbitals are used to form these hybrid orbitals, this is called sp2
hybridization. Note from Fig. 9.8 that the plane of the sp2 hybridized orbitals is determined by which p orbitals are used. Since in this case we have arbitrarily decided to use
the px and py orbitals, the hybrid orbitals are centered in the xy plane.
In forming the sp2 orbitals, one 2p orbital on carbon has not been used. This remaining
p orbital (pz) is oriented perpendicular to the plane of the sp2 orbitals, as shown in Fig. 9.10.
Now we will see how these orbitals can be used to account for the bonds in ethylene.
The three sp2 orbitals on each carbon can be used to share electrons, as shown in Fig. 9.11.
In each of these bonds, the electron pair is shared in an area centered on a line running
between the atoms. This type of covalent bond is called a sigma () bond. In the ethylene molecule, the ␴ bonds are formed using sp2 orbitals on each carbon atom and the 1s
orbital on each hydrogen atom.
How can we explain the double bond between the carbon atoms? In the ␴ bond the
electron pair occupies the space between the carbon atoms. The second bond must therefore result from sharing an electron pair in the space above and below the ␴ bond. This
type of bond can be formed using the 2p orbital perpendicular to the sp2 hybrid orbitals
on each carbon atom (refer to Fig. 9.10). These parallel p orbitals can share an electron
pair, which occupies the space above and below a line joining the atoms, to form a pi ()
bond, as shown in Fig. 9.12.

2p

Hybridization

2p
sp 2

FIGURE 9.9
An orbital energy-level diagram for sp2 hybridization. Note that one p orbital remains
unchanged.

E

2s
Orbitals in an isolated
carbon atom

Carbon orbitals
in ethylene

9.1 Hybridization and the Localized Electron Model
p orbital
sp 2

orbital

H1s

sp 2

H1s

orbital

sp 2

Visualization: Hybridization: sp 2

Visualization: Formation of
CPC Double Bond in Ethylene

C

pi bond

sp 2
sp 2

H1s

sp 2

FIGURE 9.11
The ␴ bonds in ethylene. Note that for each
bond the shared electron pair occupies the region directly between the atoms.

FIGURE 9.10
When an s and two p orbitals are mixed to
form a set of three sp2 orbitals, one p orbital remains unchanged and is perpendicular to the plane of the hybrid orbitals. Note
that in this ﬁgure and those that follow,
the orbitals are drawn with narrowed lobes
to show their orientations more clearly.

C

C
sp 2

H1s

p orbital

sp 2

C
sp 2 orbital

p orbital

395

sigma
bond

FIGURE 9.12
A carbon–carbon double bond consists of a
␴ bond and a ␲ bond. In the ␴ bond the
shared electrons occupy the space directly
between the atoms. The ␲ bond is formed
from the unhybridized p orbitals on the
two carbon atoms. In a ␲ bond the shared
electron pair occupies the space above and
below a line joining the atoms.

Note that ␴ bonds are formed from orbitals whose lobes point toward each other, but
␲ bonds result from parallel orbitals. A double bond always consists of one ␴ bond, where
the electron pair is located directly between the atoms, and one ␲ bond, where the shared
pair occupies the space above and below the ␴ bond.
We can now completely specify the orbitals that this model assumes are used to form
the bonds in the ethylene molecule. As shown in Fig. 9.13, the carbon atoms use sp2 hybrid
orbitals to form the ␴ bonds to the hydrogen atoms and to each other, and they use p to
form the ␲ bond with each other. Note that we have accounted fully for the Lewis structure of ethylene with its carbon–carbon double bond and carbon–hydrogen single bonds.
This example illustrates an important general principle of this model: Whenever an
atom is surrounded by three effective pairs, a set of sp2 hybrid orbitals is required.

sp Hybridization
Another type of hybridization occurs in carbon dioxide, which has the following Lewis
structure:

In the CO2 molecule the carbon atom has two effective pairs that will be arranged at an
angle of 180 degrees. We therefore need a pair of atomic orbitals oriented in opposite
directions. This requires a new type of hybridization, since neither sp3 nor sp2 hybrid

sp 2

sp 2

sp 2

sp 2

Visualization: Hybridization: sp
H1s

C

H1s

C

H
H

FIGURE 9.13
(a) The orbitals used to form the bonds
in ethylene. (b) The Lewis structure for
ethylene.

sp 2
(a)

2p

H
C

sp 2
(b)

C
H

396

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

z

z

z

z

z
gives a linear
arrangement

Hybridization
x

x

y

x

y

y

s

180°

x

x
y

y

px

FIGURE 9.14
When one s orbital and one p orbital are hybridized, a set of two sp orbitals oriented at 180 degrees results.

sp 2
sp 2

sp 2

sp 2

2p

O

O

C
sp

sp

E
sp 2

Hybridization

2p

2p

sp

sp

2s
Orbitals in a
free C atom

Orbitals in the sp
hybridized C in CO2

sp 2

FIGURE 9.15
The hybrid orbitals in the CO2 molecule.

p

sp

sp

C
p

FIGURE 9.17
The orbitals of an sp hybridized carbon
atom.

More rigorous theoretical models of CO2
indicate that each of the oxygen atoms
uses two p orbitals simultaneously to
form the pi bonds to the carbon atom,
thus leading to unusually strong CPO
bonds.

p
sp 2

sp 2
O

sp 2

FIGURE 9.16
The orbital energy-level diagram for the formation of sp hybrid
orbitals on carbon.

orbitals will ﬁt this case. To obtain two hybrid orbitals arranged at 180 degrees requires
sp hybridization, involving one s orbital and one p orbital, as shown in Fig. 9.14.
In terms of this model, two effective pairs around an atom will always require sp
hybridization of that atom. The sp orbitals of carbon in carbon dioxide can be seen in
Fig. 9.15, and the corresponding orbital energy-level diagram for their formation is given
in Fig. 9.16. These sp hybrid orbitals are used to form the ␴ bonds between the carbon
and the oxygen atoms. Note that two 2p orbitals remain unchanged on the sp hybridized
carbon. These are used to form the ␲ bonds with the oxygen atoms.
In the CO2 molecule each oxygen atom* has three effective pairs around it, requiring a trigonal planar arrangement of the pairs. Since a trigonal set of hybrid orbitals requires
sp2 hybridization, each oxygen atom is sp2 hybridized. One p orbital on each oxygen is
unchanged and is used for the ␲ bond with the carbon atom.
Now we are ready to use our model to describe the bonding in carbon dioxide. The
sp orbitals on carbon form ␴ bonds with the sp2 orbitals on the two oxygen atoms
(Fig. 9.15). The remaining sp2 orbitals on the oxygen atoms hold lone pairs. The ␲ bonds
between the carbon atom and each oxygen atom are formed by the overlap of parallel
2p orbitals. The sp hybridized carbon atom has two unhybridized p orbitals, pictured in
Fig. 9.17. Each of these p orbitals is used to form a ␲ bond with an oxygen atom (see
Fig. 9.18). The total bonding picture for the CO2 molecule is shown in Fig. 9.19. Note
that this picture of the bonding neatly explains the arrangement of electrons predicted by
the Lewis structure.
Another molecule whose bonding can be described by sp hybridization is acetylene
(C2H2), which has the systematic name ethyne. The Lewis structure for acetylene is
H¬C ‚ C¬H

FIGURE 9.18
The orbital arrangement for an sp2
hybridized oxygen atom.

*We will assume that minimizing electron repulsions also is important for the peripheral atoms in a
molecule and apply the VSEPR model to these atoms as well.

9.1 Hybridization and the Localized Electron Model
sigma bond
(1 pair of electrons)

FIGURE 9.19
(a) The orbitals used to form the bonds
in carbon dioxide. Note that the carbon–
oxygen double bonds each consist of one
␴ bond and one ␲ bond. (b) The Lewis
structure for carbon dioxide.

O

397

pi bond
(1 pair of
electrons)

C

O

O

C

O

pi bond
(1 pair of
electrons)
(b)

(a)

Because the triple bond counts as one effective repulsive unit, each carbon has two effective
pairs, which requires a linear arrangement. Thus each carbon atom requires sp hybridization, leaving two unchanged p orbitals (see Fig. 9.16). One of the oppositely oriented (see
Fig. 9.14) sp orbitals is used to form a bond to the hydrogen atom; the other sp orbital
overlaps with the similar sp orbital on the other carbon to form the sigma bond. The two
pi bonds are formed from the overlap of the two p orbitals on each carbon. This accounts
for the triple bond (one sigma and two pi bonds) in acetylene.

Sample Exercise 9.2

The Localized Electron Model II
Describe the bonding in the N2 molecule.
Solution
The Lewis structure for the nitrogen molecule is
:N‚N:
where each nitrogen atom is surrounded by two effective pairs. (Remember that a multiple bond counts as one effective pair.) This gives a linear arrangement (180 degrees) requiring a pair of oppositely directed orbitals. This situation requires sp hybridization. Each
nitrogen atom in the nitrogen molecule has two sp hybrid orbitals and two unchanged
p orbitals, as shown in Fig. 9.20(a). The sp orbitals are used to form the ␴ bond between
the nitrogen atoms and to hold lone pairs, as shown in Fig. 9.20(b). The p orbitals are
used to form the two ␲ bonds [see Fig. 9.20(c)]; each pair of overlapping parallel p orbitals holds one electron pair. Such bonding accounts for the electron arrangement given
by the Lewis structure. The triple bond consists of a ␴ bond (overlap of two sp orbitals)
and two ␲ bonds (each one from an overlap of two p orbitals). In addition, a lone pair
occupies an sp orbital on each nitrogen atom.
See Exercises 9.17 and 9.18.

dsp3 Hybridization
To illustrate the treatment of a molecule in which the central atom exceeds the octet rule,
consider the bonding in the phosphorus pentachloride molecule (PCl5). The Lewis structure

398

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

p
lone pair
sp

sp

N

sigma bond
N

sp

lone pair
N

sp

sp

sp

p
(b)

(a)

FIGURE 9.20
(a) An sp hybridized nitrogen atom. There
are two sp hybrid orbitals and two unhybridized p orbitals. (b) The ␴ bond in the
N2 molecule. (c) The two ␲ bonds in N2 are
formed when electron pairs are shared
between two sets of parallel p orbitals.
(d) The total bonding picture for N2.

dsp3
dsp3
dsp3
P
dsp3
dsp3

FIGURE 9.21
A set of dsp3 hybrid orbitals on a phosphorus atom. Note that the set of ﬁve dsp3
orbitals has a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement. (Each dsp3 orbital also has a small
lobe that is not shown in this diagram.)

Sample Exercise 9.3

N

N

(c)

N

N

(d)

shows that the phosphorus atom is surrounded by ﬁve electron pairs. Since ﬁve pairs
require a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement, we need a trigonal bipyramidal set of atomic
orbitals on phosphorus. Such a set of orbitals is formed by dsp3 hybridization of one d
orbital, one s orbital, and three p orbitals, as shown in Fig. 9.21.
The dsp3 hybridized phosphorus atom in the PCl5 molecule uses its ﬁve dsp3 orbitals
to share electrons with the ﬁve chlorine atoms. Note that a set of ﬁve effective pairs around
a given atom always requires a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement, which in turn requires
dsp3 hybridization of that atom.
The Lewis structure for PCl5 shows that each chlorine atom is surrounded by four
electron pairs. This requires a tetrahedral arrangement, which in turn requires a set of four
sp3 orbitals on each chlorine atom.
Now we can describe the bonding in the PCl5 molecule. The ﬁve POCl ␴ bonds are
formed by sharing electrons between a dsp3 orbital* on the phosphorus atom and an sp3
orbital on each chlorine.† The other sp3 orbitals on each chlorine hold lone pairs. This is
shown in Fig. 9.22.

The Localized Electron Model III
Describe the bonding in the triiodide ion (I3).
Solution
The Lewis structure for I3

*There is considerable controversy about whether the d orbitals are as heavily involved in the bonding in
these molecules as this model predicts. However, this matter is beyond the scope of this text.
†
Although we have no way of proving conclusively that each chlorine is sp3 hybridized, we assume that
minimizing electron-pair repulsions is as important for peripheral atoms as for the central atom. Thus we
will apply the VSEPR model and hybridization to both central and peripheral atoms.

9.1 Hybridization and the Localized Electron Model

399

Cl

Cl

Cl

P

(a)

Cl

FIGURE 9.22
(a) The structure of the PCI5 molecule.
(b) The orbitals used to form the bonds in
PCl5. The phosphorus uses a set of ﬁve dsp3
orbitals to share electron pairs with sp3
orbitals on the ﬁve chlorine atoms. The
other sp3 orbitals on each chlorine atom
hold lone pairs.

Cl

(b)

shows that the central iodine atom has ﬁve pairs of electrons (see Section 8.11). A set of
ﬁve pairs requires a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement, which in turn requires a set of dsp3
orbitals. The outer iodine atoms have four pairs of electrons, which calls for a tetrahedral
arrangement and sp3 hybridization.
Thus the central iodine is dsp3 hybridized. Three of these hybrid orbitals hold lone
pairs, and two of them overlap with sp3 orbitals of the other two iodine atoms to form
␴ bonds.
See Exercise 9.23.
d 2sp 3 hybridization gives six orbitals
arranged octahedrally.

d 2sp3

d2sp3 Hybridization
Some molecules have six pairs of electrons around a central atom; an example is sulfur
hexaﬂuoride (SF6), which has the Lewis structure
F

F

S

d 2sp3
d 2sp3

F

d 2sp3

S

F
d 2sp3
d 2sp3

FIGURE 9.23
An octahedral set of d2sp3 orbitals on a
sulfur atom. The small lobe of each hybrid
orbital has been omitted for clarity.

F

F

This requires an octahedral arrangement of pairs and in turn an octahedral set of six hybrid
orbitals, or d2sp3 hybridization, in which two d orbitals, one s orbital, and three p orbitals
are combined (see Fig. 9.23). Note that six electron pairs around an atom are always
arranged octahedrally and require d2sp3 hybridization of the atom. Each of the d2sp3 orbitals on the sulfur atom is used to bond to a ﬂuorine atom. Since there are four pairs on
each ﬂuorine atom, the ﬂuorine atoms are assumed to be sp3 hybridized.

400

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

Sample Exercise 9.4

The Localized Electron Model IV
How is the xenon atom in XeF4 hybridized?
Solution
As seen in Sample Exercise 8.13, XeF4 has six pairs of electrons around xenon that are
arranged octahedrally to minimize repulsions. An octahedral set of six atomic orbitals is
required to hold these electrons, and the xenon atom is d2sp3 hybridized.

F

F
Xe

F
F

Xenon uses six d2sp3 hybrid
atomic orbitals to bond to
the four ﬂuorine atoms and
to hold the two lone pairs.

See Exercise 9.24.

The Localized Electron Model: A Summary
The description of a molecule using the localized electron model involves three distinct
steps.

Localized Electron Model

➥1
➥2
➥3

Draw the Lewis structure(s).
Determine the arrangement of electron pairs using the VSEPR model.
Specify the hybrid orbitals needed to accommodate the electron pairs.

It is important to do the steps in this order. For a model to be successful, it must follow nature’s priorities. In the case of bonding, it seems clear that the tendency for a
molecule to minimize its energy is more important than the maintenance of the characteristics of atoms as they exist in the free state. The atoms adjust to meet the “needs”
of the molecule. When considering the bonding in a particular molecule, therefore, we
always start with the molecule rather than the component atoms. In the molecule the
electrons will be arranged to give each atom a noble gas conﬁguration, where possible,
and to minimize electron-pair repulsions. We then assume that the atoms adjust their
orbitals by hybridization to allow the molecule to adopt the structure that gives the
minimum energy.
In applying the localized electron model, we must remember not to overemphasize the characteristics of the separate atoms. It is not where the valence electrons
originate that is important; it is where they are needed in the molecule to achieve stability.
In the same vein, it is not the orbitals in the isolated atom that matter, but which orbitals
the molecule requires for minimum energy.
The requirements for the various types of hybridization are summarized in Fig. 9.24
on the following page.

9.1 Hybridization and the Localized Electron Model
Number of
Effective Pairs

Arrangement
of Pairs

401

Hybridization
Required
180°

2

Linear

sp

3

Trigonal
planar

sp 2
120°

109.5°
4

Tetrahedral

sp 3

90°
5

Trigonal
bipyramidal

dsp3
120°

90°
6

Octahedral

d 2sp 3

FIGURE 9.24
The relationship of the number of effective
pairs, their spatial arrangement, and the
hybrid orbital set required.

Sample Exercise 9.5

90°

The Localized Electron Model V
For each of the following molecules or ions, predict the hybridization of each atom, and
describe the molecular structure.
a. CO

b. BF4

c. XeF2

Solution
a. The CO molecule has 10 valence electrons, and its Lewis structure is

Each atom has two effective pairs, which means that both are sp hybridized. The triple
bond consists of a ␴ bond produced by overlap of an sp orbital from each atom and

402

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals
two ␲ bonds produced by overlap of 2p orbitals from each atom. The lone pairs are in
sp orbitals. Since the CO molecule has only two atoms, it must be linear.
2p

2p

Lone pairs
sp

sp

sp

C

sp
2p

O

2p

C

O

C– O sigma bond

pi bonds

b. The BF4 ion has 32 valence electrons. The Lewis structure shows four pairs of electrons around the boron atom, which means a tetrahedral arrangement:

This requires sp3 hybridization of the boron atom. Each ﬂuorine atom also has four
electron pairs and can be assumed to be sp3 hybridized (only one sp3 orbital is shown
for each ﬂuorine atom). The BF4 ion’s molecular structure is tetrahedral.
F
sp3
sp3
F

B
F

F

c. The XeF2 molecule has 22 valence electrons. The Lewis structure shows ﬁve electron
pairs on the xenon atom, which requires a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement:
F
F
Xe

5 electron pairs
around Xe

Xe

F
F

9.2 The Molecular Orbital Model

403

Note that the lone pairs are placed in the plane where they are 120 degrees apart. To
accommodate ﬁve pairs at the vertices of a trigonal bipyramid requires that the xenon
atom adopt a set of ﬁve dsp3 orbitals. Each ﬂuorine atom has four electron pairs and
can be assumed to be sp3 hybridized. The XeF2 molecule has a linear arrangement of
atoms.
F
sp3
dsp3

Xe

F

See Exercises 9.27 and 9.28.

9.2
Visualization: Bonding in H2

Molecular orbital theory parallels the
atomic theory discussed in Chapter 7.

The Molecular Orbital Model

We have seen that the localized electron model is of great value in interpreting the
structure and bonding of molecules. However, there are some problems with this model.
For example, it incorrectly assumes that electrons are localized, and so the concept of
resonance must be added. Also, the model does not deal effectively with molecules containing unpaired electrons. And ﬁnally, the model gives no direct information about bond
energies.
Another model often used to describe bonding is the molecular orbital model.
To introduce the assumptions, methods, and results of this model, we will consider
the simplest of all molecules, H2, which consists of two protons and two electrons.
A very stable molecule, H2 is lower in energy than the separated hydrogen atoms by
432 kJ/mol.
Since the hydrogen molecule consists of protons and electrons, the same components
found in separated hydrogen atoms, it seems reasonable to use a theory similar to the
atomic theory discussed in Chapter 7, which assumes that the electrons in an atom exist
in orbitals of a given energy. Can we apply this same type of model to the hydrogen
molecule? Yes. In fact, describing the H2 molecule in terms of quantum mechanics is quite
straightforward.
However, even though it is formulated rather easily, this problem cannot be solved
exactly. The difﬁculty is the same as that in dealing with polyelectronic atoms—the electron
correlation problem. Since we do not know the details of the electron movements, we cannot deal with the electron–electron interactions in a speciﬁc way. We need to make approximations that allow a solution of the problem but do not destroy the model’s physical integrity. The success of these approximations can only be measured by comparing
predictions based on theory with experimental observations. In this case we will see that
the simpliﬁed model works very well.
Just as atomic orbitals are solutions to the quantum mechanical treatment of atoms,
molecular orbitals (MOs) are solutions to the molecular problem. Molecular orbitals

404

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

+

+

1sA

–

+
1sA

+

+

–

1sB

antibonding (MO2)

+

+

1sB

bonding (MO1)

FIGURE 9.25
The combination of hydrogen 1s atomic orbitals to form MOs. The phases of the orbitals are shown by signs inside the boundary surfaces. When the orbitals are added,
the matching phases produce constructive
interference, which give enhanced electron
probability between the nuclei. This results
in a bonding molecular orbital. When
one orbital is subtracted from the other,
destructive interference occurs between the
opposite phases, leading to a node between
the nuclei. This is an antibonding MO.

Energy diagram
HA

H2

HB
MO2

E
1sA

1sB
MO1

(a)
Electron probability distribution

(b)

FIGURE 9.26
(a) The MO energy-level diagram for the H2
molecule. (b) The shapes of the MOs are
obtained by squaring the wave functions
for MO1 and MO2. The positions of the
nuclei are indicated by .

Visualization: Sigma Bonding
and Antibonding Orbitals

have many of the same characteristics as atomic orbitals. Two of the most important are
that they can hold two electrons with opposite spins and that the square of the molecular
orbital wave function indicates electron probability.
We will now describe the bonding in the hydrogen molecule using this model. The
ﬁrst step is to obtain the hydrogen molecule’s orbitals, a process that is greatly simpliﬁed
if we assume that the molecular orbitals can be constructed from the hydrogen 1s atomic
orbitals.
When the quantum mechanical equations for the hydrogen molecule are solved, two
molecular orbitals result, which can be represented as
MO1  1sA  1sB
MO2  1sA  1sB
where 1sA and 1sB represent the 1s orbitals from the two separated hydrogen atoms. This
process is shown schematically in Fig. 9.25.
The orbital properties of most interest are size, shape (described by the electron
probability distribution), and energy. These properties for the hydrogen molecular
orbitals are represented in Fig. 9.26. From Fig. 9.26 we can note several important
points:
1. The electron probability of both molecular orbitals is centered along the line passing
through the two nuclei. For MO1 the greatest electron probability is between the nuclei, and for MO2 it is on either side of the nuclei. This type of electron distribution
is described as sigma (␴), as in the localized electron model. Accordingly, we refer
to MO1 and MO2 as sigma () molecular orbitals.
2. In the molecule only the molecular orbitals are available for occupation by electrons. The 1s atomic orbitals of the hydrogen atoms no longer exist, because the H2
molecule—a new entity—has its own set of new orbitals.
3. MO1 is lower in energy than the 1s orbitals of free hydrogen atoms, while MO2 is
higher in energy than the 1s orbitals. This fact has very important implications for
the stability of the H2 molecule, since if the two electrons (one from each hydrogen
atom) occupy the lower-energy MO1, they will have lower energy than they do in the
two separate hydrogen atoms. This situation favors molecule formation, because nature
tends to seek the lowest energy state. That is, the driving force for molecule formation
is that the molecular orbital available to the two electrons has lower energy than the
atomic orbitals these electrons occupy in the separated atoms. This situation is
favorable to bonding, or probonding.
On the other hand, if the two electrons were forced to occupy the higher-energy
MO2, they would be deﬁnitely antibonding. In this case, these electrons would have
lower energy in the separated atoms than in the molecule, and the separated state
would be favored. Of course, since the lower-energy MO1 is available, the two
electrons occupy that MO and the molecule is stable.
We have seen that the molecular orbitals of the hydrogen molecule fall into two
classes: bonding and antibonding. A bonding molecular orbital is lower in energy
than the atomic orbitals of which it is composed. Electrons in this type of orbital will
favor the molecule; that is, they will favor bonding. An antibonding molecular
orbital is higher in energy than the atomic orbitals of which it is composed. Electrons
in this type of orbital will favor the separated atoms (they are antibonding). Figure 9.27
illustrates these ideas.
4. Figure 9.26 shows that for the bonding molecular orbital in the H2 molecule the electrons have the greatest probability of being between the nuclei. This is exactly what
we would expect, since the electrons can lower their energies by being simultaneously attracted by both nuclei. On the other hand, the electron distribution for the

9.2 The Molecular Orbital Model
Bonding will result if the molecule has
lower energy than the separated atoms.

Antibonding MO

A
E

Energy of
an atomic
orbital in
a free atom

B

Bonding MO

Energy of
an atomic
orbital in
a free atom

405

antibonding molecular orbital is such that the electrons are mainly outside the space
between the nuclei. This type of distribution is not expected to provide any bonding
force. In fact, it causes the electrons to be higher in energy than in the separated atoms.
Thus the molecular orbital model produces electron distributions and energies
that agree with our basic ideas of bonding. This fact reassures us that the model is
physically reasonable.
5. The labels on molecular orbitals indicate their symmetry (shape), the parent atomic
orbitals, and whether they are bonding or antibonding. Antibonding character is
indicated by an asterisk. For the H2 molecule, both MOs have ␴ symmetry, and both
are constructed from hydrogen 1s atomic orbitals. The molecular orbitals for H2 are
therefore labeled as follows:
MO1  s1s
MO2  s1s*

FIGURE 9.27
Bonding and antibonding molecular
orbitals (MOs).

7. Each molecular orbital can hold two electrons, but the spins must be opposite.

Atomic orbitals in
a free H atom

8. Orbitals are conserved. The number of molecular orbitals will always be the same as
the number of atomic orbitals used to construct them.

σ1s*
E
H1s

H1s

σ1s
σ1s* and σ1s are
molecular orbitals
in the H2 molecule.

FIGURE 9.28
A molecular orbital energy-level diagram
for the H2 molecule.

Although the model predicts that H2
should be stable, this ion has never been
observed, again emphasizing the perils of
simple models.

σ1s*

E

H1s

6. Molecular electron conﬁgurations can be written in much the same way as atomic
(electron) conﬁgurations. Since the H2 molecule has two electrons in the ␴1s molecular orbital, the electron conﬁguration is ␴1s2.

Many of the above points are summarized in Fig. 9.28.
Now suppose we could form the H2 ion from a hydride ion (H) and a hydrogen
atom. Would this species be stable? Since the H ion has the conﬁguration 1s2 and the
H atom has a 1s1 conﬁguration, we will use 1s atomic orbitals to construct the MO
diagram for the H2 ion, as shown in Fig. 9.29. The electron conﬁguration for H2 is
(␴1s)2(␴1s*)1.
The key idea is that the H2 ion will be stable if it has a lower energy than its separated parts. From Fig. 9.29 we see that in going from the separated H ion and H atom
to the H2 ion, the model predicts that two electrons are lowered in energy and one electron is raised in energy. In other words, two electrons are bonding and one electron is
antibonding. Since more electrons favor bonding, H2 is predicted to be a stable entity—
a bond has formed. But how would we expect the bond strengths in the molecules of H2
and H2 to compare?
In the formation of the H2 molecule, two electrons are lowered in energy and no electrons are raised in energy compared with the parent atoms. When H2 is formed, two electrons are lowered in energy and one is raised, producing a net lowering of the energy of
only one electron. Thus the model predicts that H2 is twice as stable as H2 with respect
to their separated components. In other words, the bond in the H2 molecule is predicted
to be about twice as strong as the bond in the H2 ion.

Bond Order
H1s

To indicate bond strength, we use the concept of bond order. Bond order is the difference between the number of bonding electrons and the number of antibonding electrons
divided by 2.

σ1s

Bond order 
FIGURE 9.29
The molecular orbital energy-level diagram
for the H2 ion.

number of bonding electrons  number of antibonding electrons
2

We divide by 2 because, from the localized electron model, we are used to thinking of
bonds in terms of pairs of electrons.

406

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals
Since the H2 molecule has two bonding electrons and no antibonding electrons, the
bond order is

σ1s*

E

Bond order 

He1s

He1s

20
1
2

The H2 ion has two bonding electrons and one antibonding electron; the bond order is
σ1s

Bond order 
FIGURE 9.30
The molecular orbital energy-level diagram
for the He2 molecule.

21
1

2
2

Bond order is an indication of bond strength because it reﬂects the difference between
the number of bonding electrons and the number of antibonding electrons. Larger bond
order means greater bond strength.
We will now apply the molecular orbital model to the helium molecule (He2). Does
this model predict that this molecule will be stable? Since the He atom has a 1s2
conﬁguration, 1s orbitals are used to construct the molecular orbitals, and the molecule will have four electrons. From the diagram shown in Fig. 9.30 it is apparent that
two electrons are raised in energy and two are lowered in energy. Thus the bond order
is zero:
22
0
2
This implies that the He2 molecule is not stable with respect to the two free He atoms,
which agrees with the observation that helium gas consists of individual He atoms.

9.3

Li

Li

1s

1s

2s

2s

Bonding in Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules

In this section we consider homonuclear diatomic molecules (those composed of two
identical atoms) of elements in Period 2 of the periodic table. Since the lithium atom
has a 1s22s1 electron conﬁguration, it would seem that we should use the Li 1s and 2s
orbitals to form the molecular orbitals of the Li2 molecule. However, the 1s orbitals on
the lithium atoms are much smaller than the 2s orbitals and therefore do not overlap in
space to any appreciable extent (see Fig. 9.31). Thus the two electrons in each 1s orbital can be assumed to be localized and not to participate in the bonding. To participate in molecular orbitals, atomic orbitals must overlap in space. This means that only
the valence orbitals of the atoms contribute signiﬁcantly to the molecular orbitals of a
particular molecule.

FIGURE 9.31
The relative sizes of the lithium 1s and 2s
atomic orbitals.

MO shapes
Li

Li2

Li
σ2s*

E

FIGURE 9.32
The molecular orbital energy-level diagram
for the Li2 molecule.

2s

2s
σ2s

9.3 Bonding in Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules

+

+
–

–

407

–
+

B

–

+

+

B

+
–

–

(a)

+

+
–
–
–

+

+

–

+

+
–

–
(c)

(b)

(d)

FIGURE 9.33
(a) The three mutually perpendicular 2p orbitals on two adjacent boron atoms. The signs indicate the orbital phases. Two pairs of parallel p
orbitals can overlap, as shown in (b) and (c), and the third pair can overlap head-on, as shown in (d).

The molecular orbital diagram of the Li2 molecule and the shapes of its bonding and
antibonding MOs are shown in Fig. 9.32. The electron conﬁguration for Li2 (valence electrons only) is ␴2s2, and the bond order is
20
1
2

Beryllium metal.

Visualization: Pi Bonding and
Antibonding Orbitals

The Li2 is a stable molecule (has lower energy than two separated lithium atoms). However, this does not mean that Li2 is the most stable form of elemental lithium. In fact, at
normal temperature and pressure, lithium exists as a solid containing many lithium atoms
bound to each other.
For the beryllium molecule (Be2) the bonding and antibonding orbitals both contain
two electrons. In this case the bond order is (2  2)2  0, and since Be2 is not more
stable than two separated Be atoms, no molecule forms. However, beryllium metal contains
many beryllium atoms bonded to each other and is stable for reasons we will discuss in
Chapter 10.
Since the boron atom has a 1s22s22p1 conﬁguration, we describe the B2 molecule by
considering how p atomic orbitals combine to form molecular orbitals. Recall that p orbitals have two lobes and that they occur in sets of three mutually perpendicular orbitals
[see Fig. 9.33(a)]. When two B atoms approach each other, two pairs of p orbitals can
overlap in a parallel fashion [Fig. 9.33(b) and (c)] and one pair can overlap head-on
[Fig. 9.33(d)].
First, let’s consider the molecular orbitals from the head-on overlap, as shown in
Fig. 9.34(a). Note that the electrons in the bonding MO are, as expected, concentrated
between the nuclei, and the electrons in the antibonding MO are concentrated outside
the area between the two nuclei. Also, both these MOs are ␴ molecular orbitals. The

408

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

+

–

+

2px

+

–
FIGURE 9.34
(a) The two p orbitals on the boron atoms
that overlap head-on combine to form ␴
bonding and antibonding orbitals. The
bonding orbital is formed by reversing the
sign of the right orbital so the positive
phases of both orbitals match between the
nuclei to produce constructive interference.
This leads to enhanced electron probability
between the nuclei. The antibonding orbital
is formed by the direct combination of the
orbitals, which gives destructive interference of the positive phase of one orbital
with the negative phase of the second orbital. This produces a node between the nuclei, which gives decreased electron probability. (b) When the parallel p orbitals are
combined with the positive and negative
phases matched, constructive interference
occurs, giving a bonding ␲ orbital. When
the orbitals have opposite phases (the signs
of one orbital are reversed), destructive
interference occurs, resulting in an
antibonding ␲ orbital.

σ2p*
π2p* π2p*
E

B2p

π2p

π2p

B2p

σ2p

FIGURE 9.35
The expected molecular orbital energy-level
diagram resulting from the combination of
the 2p orbitals on two boron atoms.

+

–

2px

+

–

σ2p*

Antibonding

–

–

+

–

2px

+

–

2px

+

–

σ2p

Bonding

(a)

+

–
+

–
π2p*

–
–
2py

+

–

+

+
Antibonding

2py

+
+
π2p

–
–
2py

–

+

Bonding

2py

(b)

p orbitals that overlap in a parallel fashion also produce bonding and antibonding orbitals [Fig. 9.34(b)]. Since the electron probability lies above and below the line between
the nuclei, both the orbitals are pi () molecular orbitals. They are designated as ␲2p
for the bonding MO and ␲2p* for the antibonding MO.
Let’s try to make an educated guess about the relative energies of the ␴ and ␲ molecular orbitals formed from the 2p atomic orbitals. Would we expect the electrons to prefer the ␴ bonding orbital (where the electron probability is concentrated in the area between
the nuclei) or the ␲ bonding orbital? The ␴ orbital would seem to have the lower energy,
since the electrons are closest to the two nuclei. This agrees with the observation that ␴
interactions are stronger than ␲ interactions.
Figure 9.35 gives the molecular orbital energy-level diagram expected when the two
sets of 2p orbitals on the boron atoms combine to form molecular orbitals. Note that there
are two ␲ bonding orbitals at the same energy (degenerate orbitals) formed from the two
pairs of parallel p orbitals, and there are two degenerate ␲ antibonding orbitals. The energy
of the ␲2p orbitals is expected to be higher than that of the ␴2p orbital because ␴ interactions
are generally stronger than ␲ interactions.
To construct the total molecular orbital diagram for the B2 molecule, we make the assumption that the 2s and 2p orbitals combine separately (in other words, there is no 2s–2p
mixing). The resulting diagram is shown in Fig. 9.36. Note that B2 has six valence
electrons. (Remember the 1s orbitals and electrons are assumed not to participate in the
bonding.) This diagram predicts the bond order:
42
1
2
Therefore, B2 should be a stable molecule.

9.3 Bonding in Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules
B
atom

B2
molecule

B
atom
σ2p*

π2p* π2p*
2p

2p
π2p

π2p
σ2p

E
σ2s*

2s

2s
σ2s

FIGURE 9.36
The expected molecular orbital energy-level
diagram for the B2 molecule.

Balance

Glass tubing
Sample tube

Electromagnet

FIGURE 9.37
Diagram of the kind of apparatus used to
measure the paramagnetism of a sample. A
paramagnetic sample will appear heavier
when the electromagnet is turned on because the sample is attracted into the inducing magnetic ﬁeld.

409

Paramagnetism
At this point we need to discuss an additional molecular property—magnetism. Most
materials have no magnetism until they are placed in a magnetic ﬁeld. However, in the
presence of such a ﬁeld, magnetism of two types can be induced. Paramagnetism causes
the substance to be attracted into the inducing magnetic ﬁeld. Diamagnetism causes the
substance to be repelled from the inducing magnetic ﬁeld. Figure 9.37 illustrates how paramagnetism is measured. The sample is weighed with the electromagnet turned off and then
weighed again with the electromagnet turned on. An increase in weight when the ﬁeld is
turned on indicates the sample is paramagnetic. Studies have shown that paramagnetism
is associated with unpaired electrons and diamagnetism is associated with paired electrons.
Any substance that has both paired and unpaired electrons will exhibit a net paramagnetism, since the effect of paramagnetism is much stronger than that of diamagnetism.
The molecular orbital energy-level diagram represented in Fig. 9.36 predicts that the
B2 molecule will be diamagnetic, since the MOs contain only paired electrons. However,
experiments show that B2 is actually paramagnetic with two unpaired electrons. Why does
the model yield the wrong prediction? This is yet another illustration of how models are
developed and used. In general, we try to use the simplest possible model that accounts
for all the important observations. In this case, although the simplest model successfully
describes the diatomic molecules up to B2, it certainly is suspect if it cannot describe
the B2 molecule correctly. This means we must either discard the model or ﬁnd a way to
modify it.
Let’s consider one assumption that we made. In our treatment of B2, we have assumed that the s and p orbitals combine separately to form molecular orbitals. Calculations show that when the s and p orbitals are allowed to mix in the same molecular
orbital, a different energy-level diagram results for B2 (see Fig. 9.38). Note that even
though the s and p contributions to the MOs are no longer separate, we retain the simple
orbital designations. The energies of ␲2p and ␴2p orbitals are reversed by p–s mixing,
and the ␴2s and the ␴2s* orbitals are no longer equally spaced relative to the energy of
the free 2s orbital.
When the six valence electrons for the B2 molecule are placed in the modiﬁed energylevel diagram, each of the last two electrons goes into one of the degenerate ␲2p orbitals.
This produces a paramagnetic molecule in agreement with experimental results. Thus,
when the model is extended to allow p–s mixing in molecular orbitals, it predicts the
correct magnetism. Note that the bond order is (4  2)2  1, as before.
The remaining diatomic molecules of the elements in Period 2 can be described using
similar ideas. For example, the C2 and N2 molecules use the same set of orbitals as for
B2 (see Fig. 9.38). Because the importance of 2s–2p mixing decreases across the period,
the ␴2p and ␲2p orbitals revert to the order expected in the absence of 2s–2p mixing for
the molecules O2 and F2, as shown in Fig. 9.39.
Several signiﬁcant points arise from the orbital diagrams, bond strengths, and bond
lengths summarized in Fig. 9.39 for the Period 2 diatomics:
1. There are deﬁnite correlations between bond order, bond energy, and bond length. As
the bond order predicted by the molecular orbital model increases, the bond energy
increases and the bond length decreases. This is a clear indication that the bond order predicted by the model accurately reﬂects bond strength, and it strongly supports
the reasonableness of the MO model.
2. Comparison of the bond energies of the B2 and F2 molecules indicates that bond order cannot automatically be associated with a particular bond energy. Although both
molecules have a bond order of 1, the bond in B2 appears to be about twice as strong
as the bond in F2. As we will see in our later discussion of the halogens, F2 has an
unusually weak single bond due to larger than usual electron–electron repulsions (there
are 14 valence electrons on the small F2 molecule).

410

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals
3. Note the very large bond energy associated with the N2 molecule, which the
molecular orbital model predicts will have a bond order of 3, a triple bond. The
very strong bond in N2 is the principal reason that many nitrogen-containing
compounds are used as high explosives. The reactions involving these explosives
give the very stable N2 molecule as a product, thus releasing large quantities of
energy.
Visualization: Magnetic
Properties of Liquid Nitrogen
and Oxygen

Sample Exercise 9.6
B
atom

B2
molecule

B
atom

σ2p*

For the species O2, O2, and O2, give the electron conﬁguration and the bond order for
each. Which has the strongest bond?

The O2 molecule has 12 valence electrons (6  6); O2 has 11 valence electrons
(6  6  1); and O2 has 13 valence electrons (6  6  1). We will assume that the ions

σ2p
π2p

E

The Molecular Orbital Model I

Solution

π2p* π2p*

2p

4. The O2 molecule is known to be paramagnetic. This can be very convincingly demonstrated by pouring liquid oxygen between the poles of a strong magnet, as shown in
Fig. 9.40. The oxygen remains there until it evaporates. Signiﬁcantly, the molecular
orbital model correctly predicts oxygen’s paramagnetism, while the localized electron
model predicts a diamagnetic molecule.

2p
π2p

B2

σ2s*
2s

2s
σ2s

FIGURE 9.38
The correct molecular orbital energy-level
diagram for the B2 molecule. When p–s
mixing is allowed, the energies of the ␴2p
and ␲2p orbitals are reversed. The two
electrons from the B 2p orbitals now
occupy separate, degenerate ␲2p molecular
orbitals and thus have parallel spins.
Therefore, this diagram explains the
observed paramagnetism of B2.

Visualization: Molecular
Orbital Diagram (N2)
FIGURE 9.39
The molecular orbital energy-level diagrams,
bond orders, bond energies, and bond lengths
for the diatomic molecules B2 through F2.
Note that for O2 and F2 the ␴2p orbital is
lower in energy than the ␲2p orbitals.

C2

N2

σ2p*

σ 2p*

π2p*

π 2p *

σ2p

π 2p

π2p

σ2p

σ2s*

σ 2s*

σ2s

σ2s

O2

F2

E

Magnetism

Para–
magnetic

Dia–
magnetic

Dia–
magnetic

Para–
magnetic

Dia–
magnetic

Bond order

1

2

3

2

1

Observed
bond
dissociation
energy
(kJ/mol)

290

620

942

495

154

Observed
bond
length
(pm)

159

131

110

121

143

9.3 Bonding in Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules

411

can be treated using the same molecular orbital diagram as for the neutral diatomic
molecule:

␴2p*
␲2p*
␲2p
␴2p
␴2s*
␴2s

O2

O2

O2

––––
—
h —
h
—
hg —
hg
——
hg
——
hg
——
hg

––––
—
h —
—
hg —
hg
——
hg
——
hg
——
hg

––––
—
hg —
h
—
hg —
hg
——
hg
——
hg
——
hg

The electron conﬁguration for each species can then be taken from the diagram:
O2:
O2  :
O2  :

1s2s 2 2 1s2s*2 2 1s2p 2 2 1p2p 2 4 1p2p*2 2
1s2s 2 2 1s2s*2 2 1s2p 2 2 1p2p 2 4 1p2p*2 1
1s2s 2 2 1s2s*2 2 1s2p 2 2 1p2p 2 4 1p2p*2 3

The bond orders are:
For O2:

FIGURE 9.40
When liquid oxygen is poured into the
space between the poles of a strong
magnet, it remains there until it boils
away. This attraction of liquid oxygen for
the magnetic ﬁeld demonstrates the
paramagnetism of the O2 molecule.

Sample Exercise 9.7

For O2  :
For O2  :

84
2
2
83
 2.5
2
85
 1.5
2

Thus O2 is expected to have the strongest bond of the three species.
See Exercises 9.39 and 9.40.

The Molecular Orbital Model II
Use the molecular orbital model to predict the bond order and magnetism of each of the
following molecules.

Visualization: Magnetic
Properties of Liquid
Nitrogen and Oxygen

a. Ne2
b. P2
Solution
a. The valence orbitals for Ne are 2s and 2p. Thus we can use the molecular orbitals we
have already constructed for the diatomic molecules of the Period 2 elements. The Ne2
molecule has 16 valence electrons (8 from each atom). Placing these electrons in the
appropriate molecular orbitals produces the following diagram:
h s2p*
A
A p2p*
A
A p2p
E A
A s2p
A
A s2s*
AA s
2s

——
hg
—
hg —
hg
—
hg —
hg
——
hg
——
hg
——
hg

The bond order is (8  8)2  0, and Ne2 does not exist.
b. The P2 molecule contains phosphorus atoms from the third row of the periodic
table. We will assume that the diatomic molecules of the Period 3 elements can be

412

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals
treated in a way very similar to that which we have used so far. Thus we will draw
the MO diagram for P2 analogous to that for N2. The only change will be that the
molecular orbitals will be formed from 3s and 3p atomic orbitals. The P2 model has
10 valence electrons (5 from each phosphorus atom). The resulting molecular orbital
diagram is
h s3p*
A
A p3p*
A
As
A 3p
E A
A p3p
A
A s3s*
A
A s3s

——
——
——
hg
—
hg —
hg
——
hg
——
hg

The molecule has a bond order of 3 and is expected to be diamagnetic.
See Exercises 9.37 through 9.42.

9.4

Bonding in Heteronuclear Diatomic Molecules

In this section we will deal with selected examples of heteronuclear (different atoms)
diatomic molecules. A special case involves molecules containing atoms adjacent to
each other in the periodic table. Since the atoms involved in such a molecule are so similar, we can use the molecular orbital diagram for homonuclear molecules. For example, we can predict the bond order and magnetism of nitric oxide (NO) by placing its
11 valence electrons (5 from nitrogen and 6 from oxygen) in the molecular orbital
energy-level diagram shown in Fig. 9.41. The molecule should be paramagnetic and has
a bond order of

σ2p*
π2p*
σ2p
E
π2p
σ2s*

83
 2.5
2

σ2s

FIGURE 9.41
The molecular orbital energy-level diagram
for the NO molecule. We assume that
orbital order is the same as that for N2.
The bond order is 2.5.

Sample Exercise 9.8

Experimentally, nitric oxide is indeed found to be paramagnetic. Notice that this oddelectron molecule is described very naturally by the MO model. In contrast, the localized
electron model, in the simple form used in this text, cannot be used readily to treat such
molecules.

The Molecular Orbital Model III
Use the molecular orbital model to predict the magnetism and bond order of the NO and
CN ions.
Solution
The NO ion has 10 valence electrons (5  6  1). The CN ion also has 10 valence electrons (4  5  1). Both ions are therefore diamagnetic and have a bond order derived
from the equation
82
3
2
The molecular orbital diagram for these two ions is the same (see Fig. 9.42).
See Exercises 9.43 and 9.44.

9.5 Combining the Localized Electron and Molecular Orbital Models

σ2p*
π2p*
σ2p
E

π2p
σ2s*
σ2s

FIGURE 9.42
The molecular orbital energy-level diagram
for both the NO and CN ions.

H
atom

HF
molecule

F
atom

σ*
1s

E
2p
σ

FIGURE 9.43
A partial molecular orbital energy-level
diagram for the HF molecule.

H nucleus

F nucleus

FIGURE 9.44
The electron probability distribution in
the bonding molecular orbital of the HF
molecule. Note the greater electron density
close to the ﬂuorine atom.

When the two atoms of a diatomic molecule are very different, the energy-level diagram for homonuclear molecules can no longer be used. A new diagram must be devised
for each molecule. We will illustrate this case by considering the hydrogen ﬂuoride (HF)
molecule. The electron conﬁgurations of the hydrogen and ﬂuorine atoms are 1s1 and
1s22s22p5, respectively. To keep things as simple as possible, we will assume that ﬂuorine
uses only one of its 2p orbitals to bond to hydrogen. Thus the molecular orbitals for HF
will be composed of ﬂuorine 2p and hydrogen 1s orbitals. Figure 9.43 gives the partial
molecular orbital energy-level diagram for HF, focusing only on the orbitals involved in
the bonding. We are assuming that ﬂuorine’s other valence electrons remain localized on
the ﬂuorine. The 2p orbital of ﬂuorine is shown at a lower energy than the 1s orbital of
hydrogen on the diagram because ﬂuorine binds its valence electrons more tightly. Thus
the 2p electron on a free ﬂuorine atom is at lower energy than the 1s electron on a free
hydrogen atom. The diagram predicts that the HF molecule should be stable because both
electrons are lowered in energy relative to their energy in the free hydrogen and ﬂuorine
atoms, which is the driving force for bond formation.
Because the ﬂuorine 2p orbital is lower in energy than the hydrogen 1s orbital, the
electrons prefer to be closer to the ﬂuorine atom. That is, the ␴ molecular orbital containing the bonding electron pair shows greater electron probability close to the ﬂuorine
(see Fig. 9.44). The electron pair is not shared equally. This causes the ﬂuorine atom to
have a slight excess of negative charge and leaves the hydrogen atom partially positive.
This is exactly the bond polarity observed for HF. Thus the molecular orbital model
accounts in a straightforward way for the different electronegativities of hydrogen and
ﬂuorine and the resulting unequal charge distribution.

9.5

Combining the Localized Electron and
Molecular Orbital Models

One of the main difﬁculties with the localized electron model is its assumption that
electrons are localized. This problem is most apparent with molecules for which several
valid Lewis structures can be drawn. It is clear that none of these structures taken alone
adequately describes the electronic structure of the molecule. The concept of resonance
was invented to solve this problem. However, even with resonance included, the localized
electron model does not describe molecules and ions such as O3 and NO3 in a very
satisfying way.
It would seem that the ideal bonding model would be one with the simplicity of the
localized electron model but with the delocalization characteristic of the molecular orbital
model. We can achieve this by combining the two models to describe molecules that require
resonance. Note that for species such as O3 and NO3 the double bond changes position
in the resonance structures (see Fig. 9.45). Since a double bond involves one ␴ and one
␲ bond, there is a ␴ bond between all bound atoms in each resonance structure. It is really
the ␲ bond that has different locations in the various resonance structures.
Therefore we conclude that the ␴ bonds in a molecule can be described as being
localized with no apparent problems. It is the ␲ bonding that must be treated as being

O
O

FIGURE 9.45
The resonance structures for O3 and NO3.
Note that it is the double bond that
occupies various positions in the resonance
structures.

413

O
O

O

O

O

N
O

O

O

N
O

O

N
O

O

O

414

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

CHEMICAL IMPACT
What’s Hot?
Capsaicin was isolated as a pure substance by L. T. Thresh
in 1846. Since then substituted capsaicins have also been
found in chilies. The spicy power of chilies derives mostly
from capsaicin and dihydrocapsaicin.
The man best known for explaining the “heat” of chilies
is Wilbur Scoville, who deﬁned the Scoville unit for measuring chili power. He arbitrarily established the hotness of
pure capsaicin as 16 million. On this scale a typical green
or red chili has a rating of about 2500 Scoville units. You
may have had an encounter with habanero chilies that left
you looking for a ﬁrehose to put out the blaze in your
mouth—habaneros have a Scoville rating of about 500,000!
Capsaicin has found many uses outside of cooking. It is
used in pepper sprays and repellant sprays for many garden
pests, although birds are unaffected by capsaicin. Capsaicin
also stimulates the body’s circulation and causes pain receptors to release endorphins, similar to the effect produced by
intense exercise. Instead of jogging you may want to sit on
the couch eating chilies. Either way you are going to sweat.

ne of the best things about New Mexico is the food.
Authentic New Mexican cuisine employs liberal amounts
of green and red chilies—often called chili peppers. Chilies
apparently originated in parts of South America and were
spread north by birds. When Columbus came to North America,
which he originally thought was India, he observed the natives
using chilies for spicing foods. When he took chilies back to
Europe, Columbus mistakenly called them peppers and the
name stuck.
The spicy payload of chilies is delivered mainly by the
chemical capsaicin, which has the following structure:

O

H
CH3O

H

O

C

C
N

H
H H

HO

H
H

HH

H

C
C

H

C

HH

C
C

C
H

C

CH3
CH3

H

H

In molecules that require resonance, it
is the ␲ bonding that is most clearly
delocalized.

FIGURE 9.46
(a) The benzene molecule consists of a ring
of six carbon atoms with one hydrogen
atom bound to each carbon; all atoms are
in the same plane. All the COC bonds are
known to be equivalent. (b) Two of the
resonance structures for the benzene
molecule. The localized electron model
must invoke resonance to account for the
six equal COC bonds.

delocalized. Thus, for molecules that require resonance, we will use the localized electron model to describe the ␴ bonding and the molecular orbital model to describe the ␲
bonding. This allows us to keep the bonding model as simple as possible and yet give a
more physically accurate description of such molecules.
We will illustrate the general method by considering the bonding in benzene, an important industrial chemical that must be handled carefully because it is a known carcinogen. The benzene molecule (C6H6) consists of a planar hexagon of carbon atoms with one
hydrogen atom bound to each carbon atom, as shown in Fig. 9.46(a). In the molecule all
six COC bonds are known to be equivalent. To explain this fact, the localized electron
model must invoke resonance [see Fig. 9.46(b)].
A better description of the bonding in benzene results when we use a combination of
the models, as described above. In this description it is assumed that the ␴ bonds of carbon involve sp2 orbitals, as shown in Fig. 9.47. These ␴ bonds are all centered in the plane
of the molecule.

H

H
H

C
C

(a)

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

C

C
H

H

H

C
C
H

H
(b)

H
H

9.5 Combining the Localized Electron and Molecular Orbital Models

Since each carbon atom is sp2 hybridized, a p orbital perpendicular to the plane of
the ring remains on each carbon atom. These six p orbitals can be used to form ␲ molecular
orbitals, as shown in Fig. 9.48(a). The electrons in the resulting ␲ molecular orbitals are
delocalized above and below the plane of the ring, as shown in Fig. 9.48(b). This gives
six equivalent COC bonds, as required by the known structure of the benzene molecule.
The benzene structure is often written as

sp 2
H

H
C

H

C

sp 2

C

C

C
H

415

H

H1s

C
H

FIGURE 9.47
The ␴ bonding system in the benzene
molecule.

to indicate the delocalized  bonding in the molecule.
Very similar treatments can be applied to other planar molecules for which resonance
is required by the localized electron model. For example, the NO3 ion can be described
using the ␲ molecular orbital system shown in Fig. 9.49. In this molecule each atom is
assumed to be sp2 hybridized, which leaves one p orbital on each atom perpendicular
to the plane of the ion. These p orbitals can combine to form the ␲ molecular orbital
system.

FIGURE 9.48
(a) The ␲ molecular orbital system in benzene is formed by combining the six p orbitals from the six sp2 hybridized carbon
atoms. (b) The electrons in the resulting ␲
molecular orbitals are delocalized over the
entire ring of carbon atoms, giving six
equivalent bonds. A composite of these orbitals is represented here.

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H
(a)

H

H

H

H

(b)

O

Visualization: Pi Bonding in
the Nitrate Ion

O
N

O
N

O

FIGURE 9.49
(a) The p orbitals used to form the ␲ bonding system in the NO3 ion. (b) A representation of the delocalization of the electrons
in the ␲ molecular orbital system of the
NO3 ion.

O

(a)

(b)

O

416

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

Key Terms

For Review

Section 9.1
hybridization
sp3 hybridization
hybrid orbitals
sp2 hybridization
sigma (␴) bond
pi (␲) bond
sp hybridization
dsp3 hybridization
d2sp3 hybridization

Section 9.2
molecular orbital model
molecular orbital (MO)
sigma (␴) molecular orbital
bonding molecular orbital
antibonding molecular orbital
bond order

Section 9.3
pi (␲) molecular orbital
paramagnetism
diamagnetism

Section 9.4
heteronuclear diatomic molecule

Section 9.5
delocalized ␲ bonding

Two widely used bonding models
䊉 Localized electron model
䊉 Molecular orbital model
Localized electron model
䊉 Molecule is pictured as a group of atoms sharing electron pairs between atomic
orbitals
䊉 Hybrid orbitals, which are combinations of the “native” atomic orbitals, are often
required to account for the molecular structure
• Four electron pairs (tetrahedral arrangement) require sp3 orbitals
• Three electron pairs (trigonal planar arrangement) require sp2 orbitals
• Two electron pairs (linear arrangement) requires sp orbitals
Two types of bonds
Sigma: electrons are shared in the area centered on a line joining the atoms
䊉 Pi: a shared electron pair occupies the space above and below the line joining the
atoms
䊉

Molecular orbital model
䊉 A molecule is assumed to be a new entity consisting of positively charged nuclei
and electrons
䊉 The electrons in the molecule are contained in molecular orbitals, which in the
simplest form of the model are constructed from the atomic orbitals of the
constituent atoms
䊉 The model correctly predicts relative bond strength, magnetism, and bond polarity
䊉 It correctly portrays electrons as being delocalized in polyatomic molecules
䊉 The main disadvantage of the model is that it is difﬁcult to apply qualitatively to
polyatomic molecules
Molecular orbitals are classiﬁed in two ways: energy and shape
䊉 Energy
• A bonding MO is lower in energy than the atomic orbitals from which it is constructed. Electrons in this type of MO are lower in energy in the molecule than
in the separated atoms and thus favor molecule formation.
• An antibonding MO is higher in energy than the atomic orbitals from which it
is constructed. Electrons in this type of MO are higher in energy in the molecule than in the separated atoms and thus do not favor molecule formation.
䊉 Shape (symmetry)
• Sigma (␴) MOs have their electron probability centered on a line passing
through the nuclei
• Pi (␲) MOs have their electron probability concentrated above and below the
line connecting the nuclei
Bond order is an index of bond strength
Bond order 

number of bonding electrons  number of antibonding electrons
2

Molecules that require the concept of resonance in the localized electron model
can be more accurately described by combining the localized electron and
molecular orbital models
䊉 The ␴ bonds are localized
䊉 The ␲ bonds are delocalized

Active Learning Questions

417

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why do we hybridize atomic orbitals to explain the bonding in covalent compounds? What type of bonds form from hybrid orbitals, sigma or pi? Explain.
2. What hybridization is required for central atoms that have a tetrahedral arrangement of electron pairs? A trigonal planar arrangement of electron pairs? A linear
arrangement of electron pairs? How many unhybridized p atomic orbitals are present when a central atom exhibits tetrahedral geometry? Trigonal planar geometry?
Linear geometry? What are the unhybridized p atomic orbitals used for?
3. Describe the bonding in H2S, CH4, H2CO, and HCN using the localized electron
model.
4. What hybridization is required for central atoms exhibiting trigonal bipyramidal
geometry? Octahedral geometry? Describe the bonding of PF5, SF4, SF6, and
IF5 using the localized electron model.
5. Electrons in ␴ bonding molecular orbitals are most likely to be found in the
region between the two bonded atoms. Why does this arrangement favor bonding? In a ␴ antibonding orbital, where are the electrons most likely to be found
in relation to the nuclei in a bond?
6. Show how 2s orbitals combine to form ␴ bonding and ␴ antibonding molecular
orbitals. Show how 2p orbitals overlap to form ␴ bonding, ␲ bonding, ␲ antibonding, and ␴ antibonding molecular orbitals.
7. What are the relationships among bond order, bond energy, and bond length?
Which of these can be measured? Distinguish between the terms paramagnetic
and diamagnetic. What type of experiment can be done to determine if a
material is paramagnetic?
8. How does molecular orbital theory explain the following observations?
a. H2 is stable, while He2 is unstable.
b. B2 and O2 are paramagnetic, while C2, N2, and F2 are diamagnetic.
c. N2 has a very large bond energy associated with it.
d. NO is more stable than NO.
9. Consider the heteronuclear diatomic molecule HF. Explain in detail how molecular orbital theory is applied to describe the bonding in HF.
10. What is delocalized ␲ bonding and what does it explain? Explain the delocalized
␲ bonding system in C6H6 (benzene) and O3 (ozone).

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the learning
that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical concepts.

1. What are molecular orbitals? How do they compare with atomic
orbitals? Can you tell by the shape of the bonding and antibonding orbitals which is lower in energy? Explain.
2. Explain the difference between the ␴ and ␲ MOs for homonuclear diatomic molecules. How are bonding and antibonding orbitals different? Why are there two ␲ MOs and one ␴ MO? Why
are the ␲ MOs degenerate?
3. Compare Figs. 9.36 and 9.38. Why are they different? Because
B2 is known to be paramagnetic, the ␲2p and ␴2p molecular orbitals
must be switched from the ﬁrst prediction. What is the rationale

for this? Why might one expect the ␴2p to be lower in energy than
the ␲2p? Why can’t we use diatomic oxygen to help us decide
whether the ␴2p or ␲2p is lower in energy?
4. Which of the following would you expect to be more favorable
energetically? Explain.
a. An H2 molecule in which enough energy is added to excite one
electron from the bonding to the antibonding MO
b. Two separate H atoms
5. Draw the Lewis structure for HCN. Indicate the hybrid orbitals,
and draw a picture showing all the bonds between the atoms,
labeling each bond as ␴ or ␲.
6. Which is the more correct statement: “The methane molecule
(CH4) is a tetrahedral molecule because it is sp3 hybridized” or
“The methane molecule (CH4) is sp3 hybridized because it is a
tetrahedral molecule”? What, if anything, is the difference
between these two statements?

418

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

20. The space-ﬁlling models of hydrogen cyanide and phosgene are
shown below.
C

Questions

H

7. In the hybrid orbital model, compare and contrast ␴ bonds versus
␲ bonds. What orbitals form the ␴ bonds and what orbitals form
the ␲ bonds? Assume the z-axis is the internuclear axis.
8. In the molecular orbital model, compare and contrast ␴ versus ␲
bonds. What orbitals form the ␴ bonds and what orbitals form the
␲ bonds? Assume the z-axis is the internuclear axis.
9. Why are d orbitals sometimes used to form hybrid orbitals? Which
period of elements does not use d orbitals for hybridization? If
necessary, which d orbitals (3d, 4d, 5d, or 6d ) would sulfur use
to form hybrid orbitals requiring d atomic orbitals? Answer the
same question for arsenic and for iodine.
10. The atoms in a single bond can rotate about the internuclear axis
without breaking the bond. The atoms in a double and triple bond
cannot rotate about the internuclear axis unless the bond is broken. Why?
11. Compare and contrast bonding versus antibonding molecular
orbitals.
12. What modiﬁcation to the molecular orbital model was made from
the experimental evidence that B2 is paramagnetic?
13. Why does the molecular orbital model do a better job in
explaining the bonding in NO and NO than the hybrid orbital
model?
14. The three NO bonds in NO 3 are all equivalent in length and
strength. How is this explained even though any valid Lewis
structure for NO3 has one double bond and two single bonds to
nitrogen?

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

The Localized Electron Model and Hybrid Orbitals
15. Use the localized electron model to describe the bonding in H2O.
16. Use the localized electron model to describe the bonding in CCl4.
17. Use the localized electron model to describe the bonding in H2CO
(carbon is the central atom).
18. Use the localized electron model to describe the bonding in C2H2
(exists as HCCH).
19. The space-ﬁlling models of ethane and ethanol are shown below.

Ethane
(C2H6)

Ethanol
(C2H5OH)

C
H
O

Use the localized electron model to describe the bonding in ethane
and ethanol.

O
Hydrogen cyanide
(HCN)

Phosgene
(COCl2)

N
Cl

Use the localized electron model to describe the bonding in hydrogen cyanide and phosgene.
21. Give the expected hybridization of the central atom for the molecules or ions in Exercises 67 and 73 from Chapter 8.
22. Give the expected hybridization of the central atom for the molecules or ions in Exercises 68 and 74 from Chapter 8.
23. Give the expected hybridization of the central atom for the molecules or ions in Exercise 71 from Chapter 8.
24. Give the expected hybridization of the central atom for the molecules in Exercise 72 from Chapter 8.
25. Give the expected hybridization of the central atom for the molecules in Exercises 91 and 92 from Chapter 8.
26. Give the expected hybridization of the central atom for the molecules in Exercises 93 and 94 from Chapter 8.
27. For each of the following molecules, write the Lewis structure(s),
predict the molecular structure (including bond angles), give the
expected hybrid orbitals on the central atom, and predict the overall polarity.
a. CF4
e. BeH2
i. KrF4
b. NF3
f. TeF4
j. SeF6
c. OF2
g. AsF5
k. IF5
d. BF3
h. KrF2
l. IF3
28. For each of the following molecules or ions that contain sulfur,
write the Lewis structure(s), predict the molecular structure (including bond angles), and give the expected hybrid orbitals for
sulfur.
a. SO2
b. SO3
c.

d.

e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.

SO32
SO42
SF2
SF4
SF6
F3SOSF
SF5

419

Exercises
29. Why must all six atoms in C2H4 be in the same plane?
30. The allene molecule has the following Lewis structure:

Are all four hydrogen atoms in the same plane? If not, what is
their spatial relationship? Explain.
31. Biacetyl and acetoin are added to margarine to make it taste more
like butter.

How many carbon atoms are sp3 hybridized?
How many carbon atoms are sp2 hybridized?
Which atom is sp hybridized?
How many ␴ bonds are in the molecule?
How many ␲ bonds are in the molecule?
What is the NONON bond angle in the azide (ON3) group?
What is the HOOOC bond angle in the side group attached
to the ﬁve-membered ring?
h. What is the hybridization of the oxygen atom in the OCH2OH
group?
34. Hot and spicy foods contain molecules that stimulate pain-detecting
nerve endings. Two such molecules are piperine and capsaicin:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

H

Complete the Lewis structures, predict values for all COCOO
bond angles, and give the hybridization of the carbon atoms in
these two compounds. Are the four carbons and two oxygens in
biacetyl in the same plane? How many ␴ bonds and how many ␲
bonds are there in biacetyl and acetoin?
32. Many important compounds in the chemical industry are derivatives of ethylene (C2H4). Two of them are acrylonitrile and methyl
methacrylate.
H
a

H

H

b

C

C

H
C

c

C

H
N

Acrylonitrile

CH3
C d
e C O
f
O

H
O
G
C
D
O
H

a

Methyl methacrylate

Complete the Lewis structures, showing all lone pairs. Give approximate values for bond angles a through f. Give the hybridization of all carbon atoms. In acrylonitrile, how many of the atoms
in the molecule lie in the same plane? How many ␴ bonds and how
many ␲ bonds are there in methyl methacrylate and acrylonitrile?
33. One of the ﬁrst drugs to be approved for use in treatment of acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS) was azidothymidine
(AZT). Complete the Lewis structure for AZT.

H

H H

H
H

CHP CHOCHPCHO CON f
Be
H
O H
H
b
c
H
H H

H
Piperine

H3CO

g

H

HO
CH3

d

O
B
CH
CH3
C
CH2
CH2
G D G
D
G J G D
i
j
l
CH
)
N
CH
(CH
k
2 3
h
G
A
CH3
H
H

H
Capsaicin

Piperine is the active compound in white and black pepper, and
capsaicin is the active compound in chili peppers. The ring structures in piperine and capsaicin are shorthand notation. Each point
where lines meet represents a carbon atom.
a. Complete the Lewis structure for piperine and capsaicin showing all lone pairs of electrons.
b. How many carbon atoms are sp, sp2, and sp3 hybridized in each
molecule?
c. Which hybrid orbitals are used by the nitrogen atoms in each
molecule?
d. Give approximate values for the bond angles marked a through
l in the above structures.

The Molecular Orbital Model
35. Which of the following are predicted by the molecular orbital
model to be stable diatomic species?
a. H2, H2, H2, H22
b. He22, He2, He2
36. Which of the following are predicted by the molecular orbital
model to be stable diatomic species?
a. N22, O22, F22
b. Be2, B2, Ne2
37. Using the molecular orbital model, write electron conﬁgurations
for the following diatomic species and calculate the bond orders.
Which ones are paramagnetic?
b. C2
c. S2
a. Li2

420

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

38. Consider the following electron conﬁguration:

1s3s 2

2

1s3s* 2 2 1s3p 2 2 1p3p 2 4 1p3p* 2 4

Give four species that, in theory, would have this electron conﬁguration
39. Using molecular orbital theory, explain why the removal of one
electron in O2 strengthens bonding, while the removal of one electron in N2 weakens bonding.
40. Using the molecular orbital model to describe the bonding in F2,
F2, and F2, predict the bond orders and the relative bond lengths
for these three species. How many unpaired electrons are present
in each species?
41. Which charge(s) for the N2 molecule would give a bond order of 2.5?
42. A Lewis structure obeying the octet rule can be drawn for O2 as
follows:

Use the molecular orbital energy-level diagram for O2 to show
that the above Lewis structure corresponds to an excited state.
43. Using the molecular orbital model, write electron conﬁgurations
for the following diatomic species and calculate the bond orders.
Which ones are paramagnetic? Place the species in order of
increasing bond length and bond energy.
a. CO
b. CO
c. CO2
44. Using the molecular orbital model, write electron conﬁgurations
for the following diatomic species and calculate the bond orders.
Which ones are paramagnetic? Place the species in order of increasing bond length and bond energy.
a. NO
b. NO
c. NO
45. In which of the following diatomic molecules would the bond
strength be expected to weaken as an electron is removed to form
the positive charged ion?
a. H2
c. C22
b. B2
d. OF
46. In terms of the molecular orbital model, which species in each of
the following two pairs will most likely be the one to gain an electron? Explain.
CN or NO
O22 or N22
47. Show how two 2p atomic orbitals can combine to form a ␴ or a
␲ molecular orbital.
48. Show how a hydrogen 1s atomic orbital and a ﬂuorine 2p atomic
orbital overlap to form bonding and antibonding molecular
orbitals in the hydrogen ﬂuoride molecule. Are these molecular
orbitals ␴ or ␲ molecular orbitals?

c. Answer the previous two questions for the antibonding molecular orbital in HF.
50. The diatomic molecule OH exists in the gas phase. The bond
length and bond energy have been measured to be 97.06 pm and
424.7 kJ/mol, respectively. Assume that the OH molecule is analogous to the HF molecule discussed in the chapter and that
molecular orbitals result from the overlap of a lower-energy pz orbital from oxygen with the higher-energy 1s orbital of hydrogen
(the OOH bond lies along the z-axis).
a. Which of the two molecular orbitals will have the greater hydrogen 1s character?
b. Can the 2px orbital of oxygen form molecular orbitals with the
1s orbital of hydrogen? Explain.
c. Knowing that only the 2p orbitals of oxygen will interact signiﬁcantly with the 1s orbital of hydrogen, complete the molecular orbital energy-level diagram for OH. Place the correct
number of electrons in the energy levels.
d. Estimate the bond order for OH.
e. Predict whether the bond order of OH will be greater than,
less than, or the same as that of OH. Explain.
51. Describe the bonding in the O3 molecule and the NO2 ion using
the localized electron model. How would the molecular orbital
model describe the bonding in these two species?
52. Describe the bonding in the CO32 ion using the localized electron model. How would the molecular orbital model describe the
␲ bonding in this species?

Additional Exercises
53. Draw the Lewis structures, predict the molecular structures, and
describe the bonding (in terms of the hybrid orbitals for the central atom) for the following.
a. XeO3
d. XeOF2
b. XeO4
e. XeO3F2
c. XeOF4
54. FClO2 and F3ClO can both gain a ﬂuoride ion to form stable anions. F3ClO and F3ClO2 will both lose a ﬂuoride ion to form stable cations. Draw the Lewis structures and describe the hybrid
orbitals used by chlorine in these ions.
55. Vitamin B6 is an organic compound whose deﬁciency in the human
body can cause apathy, irritability, and an increased susceptibility
to infections. Below is an incomplete Lewis structure for vitamin
B6. Complete the Lewis structure and answer the following questions. Hint: Vitamin B6 can be classiﬁed as an organic compound
(a compound based on carbon atoms). The majority of Lewis structures for simple organic compounds have all atoms with a formal
charge of zero. Therefore, add lone pairs and multiple bonds to the
structure below to give each atom a formal charge of zero.
O
b C

49. Use Figs. 9.43 and 9.44 to answer the following questions.
a. Would the bonding molecular orbital in HF place greater electron density near the H or the F atom? Why?
b. Would the bonding molecular orbital have greater ﬂuorine 2p
character, greater hydrogen 1s character, or an equal contribution from both? Why?

a

H
g

H

O
C
H
C

C

H

f

H H

c

C

O

C
d
e

N

C
H
C
H

H

Additional Exercises
a. How many ␴ bonds and ␲ bonds exist in vitamin B6?
b. Give approximate values for the bond angles marked a through
g in the structure.
c. How many carbon atoms are sp2 hybridized?
d. How many carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen atoms are sp3 hybridized?
e. Does vitamin B6 exhibit delocalized ␲ bonding? Explain.
56. Aspartame is an artiﬁcial sweetener marketed under the name
Nutra-Sweet. A partial Lewis structure for aspartame is shown
below.

421

b. N2F2
c. C4H6
H
H

H

C* C* C* C* H
H

H

d. ICl3

O
C

O
H2 N

CH
CH2

C
C

NH

OCH3

CHCH2

60. Complete the following resonance structures for POCl3.

OH

O

O

Cl

Note that the six-sided ring is shorthand notation for a benzene
ring (OC6H5). Benzene is discussed in Section 9.5. Complete the
Lewis structure for aspartame. How many C and N atoms exhibit
sp2 hybridization? How many C and O atoms exhibit sp3
hybridization? How many ␴ and ␲ bonds are in aspartame?
Aspartame is an organic compound and the Lewis structure follows the guidelines outlined in Exercise 55.
57. Using bond energies from Table 8.4, estimate the barrier to rotation about a carbon–carbon double bond. To do this, consider what
must happen to go from
61.

to

62.
in terms of making and breaking chemical bonds; that is, what
must happen in terms of the ␲ bond?
58. The three most stable oxides of carbon are carbon monoxide (CO),
carbon dioxide (CO2), and carbon suboxide (C3O2). The spaceﬁlling models for these three compounds are

For each oxide, draw the Lewis structure, predict the molecular
structure, and describe the bonding (in terms of the hybrid orbitals
for the carbon atoms).
59. Complete the Lewis structures of the following molecules. Predict the molecular structure, polarity, bond angles, and hybrid orbitals used by the atoms marked by asterisks for each molecule.
a. BH3
H
B*
H

H

63.

64.

65.

66.

P

O
Cl

Cl

P

Cl

Cl

(A)

(B)

Cl

a. Would you predict the same molecular structure from each resonance structure?
b. What is the hybridization of P in each structure?
c. What orbitals can the P atom use to form the ␲ bond in structure B?
d. Which resonance structure would be favored on the basis of
formal charges?
The N2O molecule is linear and polar.
a. On the basis of this experimental evidence, which arrangement,
NNO or NON, is correct? Explain your answer.
b. On the basis of your answer to part a, write the Lewis
structure of N2O (including resonance forms). Give the
formal charge on each atom and the hybridization of the
central atom.
OS be described
c. How would the multiple bonding in SNqNOO
Q
in terms of orbitals?
Describe the bonding in NO, NO, and NO using both the localized electron and molecular orbital models. Account for any
discrepancies between the two models.
Describe the bonding in the ﬁrst excited state of N2 (the one
closest in energy to the ground state) using the molecular orbital model. What differences do you expect in the properties
of the molecule in the ground state as compared to the ﬁrst excited state? (An excited state of a molecule corresponds to an
electron arrangement other than that giving the lowest possible
energy.)
Acetylene (C2H2) can be produced from the reaction of calcium
carbide (CaC2) with water. Use both the localized electron and
molecular orbital models to describe the bonding in the acetylide
anion (C22).
Using an MO energy-level diagram, would you expect F2 to have
a lower or higher ﬁrst ionization energy than atomic ﬂuorine?
Why?
Show how a dxz atomic orbital and a pz atomic orbital combine
to form a bonding molecular orbital. Assume the x-axis is the

422

Chapter Nine Covalent Bonding: Orbitals

internuclear axis. Is a ␴ or a ␲ molecular orbital formed?
Explain.
67. What type of molecular orbital would result from the in phase
combination of two dxz atomic orbitals shown below? Assume the
x-axis is the internuclear axis.

z

–

z

+

+

–
x

x

+

72. Cholesterol (C27H46O) has the following structure:

–

–

+

68. Consider three molecules: A, B, and C. Molecule A has a
hybridization of sp3. Molecule B has two more effective pairs
(electron pairs around the central atom) than molecule A. Molecule C consists of two ␴ bonds and two ␲ bonds. Give the molecular
structure, hybridization, bond angles, and an example for each
molecule.

In such shorthand structures, each point where lines meet represents a carbon atom and most H atoms are not shown. Draw the
complete structure showing all carbon and hydrogen atoms. (There
will be four bonds to each carbon atom.) Indicate which carbon
atoms use sp2 or sp3 hybrid orbitals. Are all carbon atoms in the
same plane, as implied by the structure?
73. Cyanamide (H2NCN), an important industrial chemical, is produced by the following steps:
CaC2  N2 ¡ CaNCN  C
Acid

CaNCN ¡ H2NCN
Cyanamide

Challenge Problems
69. Consider your Lewis structure for the computer-generated model
of caffeine shown in Exercise 130 of Chapter 8. How many C and
N atoms are sp2 hybridized in your Lewis structure for caffeine?
How many C and N atoms are sp3 hybridized? sp hybridized?
How many ␴ and ␲ bonds are in your Lewis structure?
70. The space-ﬁlling model for benzoic acid is shown below.
C

Describe the bonding in benzoic acid using the localized electron
model combined with the molecular orbital model.
71. Two structures can be drawn by cyanuric acid:
H

H

O
C

N

N
C
O

H

N
O

H

NCNC(NH2)2
Dicyandiamide

H2N
NCNC(NH2)2

Heat
NH3

N

NH2

C

C

N

N

Melamine
( bonds
not shown)

Benzoic acid
(C6H5CO2H)

N

Acid

NH2

O

C

H2NCN

C

H

O

Calcium cyanamide (CaNCN) is used as a direct-application fertilizer, weed killer, and cotton defoliant. It is also used to make
cyanamide, dicyandiamide, and melamine plastics:

C

O

H

C

N

N
C
O

H

a. Are these two structures the same molecule? Explain.
b. Give the hybridization of the carbon and nitrogen atoms in each
structure.
c. Use bond energies (Table 8.4) to predict which form is more
stable; that is, which contains the strongest bonds?

a. Write Lewis structures for NCN2, H2NCN, dicyandiamide,
and melamine, including resonance structures where appropriate.
b. Give the hybridization of the C and N atoms in each species.
c. How many ␴ bonds and how many ␲ bonds are in each species?
d. Is the ring in melamine planar?
e. There are three different CON bond distances in dicyandiamide, NCNC(NH2)2, and the molecule is nonlinear. Of all the
resonance structures you drew for this molecule, predict which
should be the most important.
74. In Exercise 75 in Chapter 8, the Lewis structures for benzene
(C6H6) were drawn. Using one of the Lewis structures, estimate
H f for C6H6(g) using bond energies and given that the standard
enthalpy of formation of C(g) is 717 kJ/mol. The experimental
H f value of C6H6(g) is 83 kJ/mol. Explain the discrepancy between the experimental value and the calculated H f value for
C6H6(g).

Integrative Problems
75. A ﬂask containing gaseous N2 is irradiated with 25-nm light.
a. Using the following information, indicate what species can
form in the ﬂask during irradiation.
N2 1g2 ¡ 2N1g2

1g2  e
N2 1g2 ¡
N1g2 ¡ N 1g2  e
N2




¢H  941 kJ/mol
¢H  1501 kJ/mol

NCl3 1g2 ¡ NCl2 1g2  Cl1g2

82. Given that the ionization energy of F2 is 290 kJ, do the following:
a. Calculate the bond energy of F2. You will need to look up the
bond energy of F2 and ionization energy of F.
b. Explain the difference in bond energy between F2 and F2 using MO theory.

¢H  1402 kJ/mol

b. What range of wavelengths will produce atomic nitrogen in
the ﬂask but will not produce any ions?
c. Explain why the ﬁrst ionization energy of N2 (1501 kJ/mol)
is greater than the ﬁrst ionization energy of atomic nitrogen
(1402 kJ/mol).
76. As compared with CO and O2, CS and S2 are very unstable molecules. Give an explanation based on the relative abilities of the
sulfur and oxygen atoms to form ␲ bonds.
77. Values of measured bond energies may vary greatly depending on
the molecule studied. Consider the following reactions:
ONCl1g2 ¡ NO1g2  Cl1g2

423

¢H  375 kJ/mol
¢H  158 kJ/mol

Rationalize the difference in the values of H for these reactions,
even though each reaction appears to involve only the breaking
of one NOCl bond. (Hint: Consider the bond order of the NO
bond in ONCl and in NO.)
78. Use the MO model to explain the bonding in BeH2. When constructing the MO energy-level diagram, assume that the Be’s 1s
electrons are not involved in bond formation.
79. Carbon monoxide (CO) forms bonds to a variety of metals and
metal ions. Its ability to bond to iron in hemoglobin is the reason
that CO is so toxic. The bond carbon monoxide forms to metals
is through the carbon atom:
M¬C‚O
a. On the basis of electronegativities, would you expect the carbon atom or the oxygen atom to form bonds to metals?
b. Assign formal charges to the atoms in CO. Which atom would
you expect to bond to a metal on this basis?
c. In the MO model, bonding MOs place more electron density
near the more electronegative atom. (See the HF molecule,
Figs. 9.43 and 9.44.) Antibonding MOs place more electron
density near the less electronegative atom in the diatomic molecule. Use the MO model to predict which atom of carbon
monoxide should form bonds to metals.
80. Arrange the following from lowest to highest ionization energy:
O, O2, O2, O2. Explain your answer.
81. Use the MO model to determine which of the following has the
smallest ionization energy: N2, O2, N22, N2, O 2, Explain your
answer.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

83. As the head engineer of your starship in charge of the warp drive,
you notice that the supply of dilithium is critically low. While
searching for a replacement fuel, you discover some diboron, B2.
a. What is the bond order in Li2 and B2?
b. How many electrons must be removed from B2 to make it isoelectronic with Li2 so that it might be used in the warp drive?
c. The reaction to make B2 isoelectronic with Li2 is generalized
(where n  number of electrons determined in part b) as
follows:
B2 S B2 n  ne 

¢H  6455 kJ/mol

How much energy is needed to ionize 1.5 kg of B2 to the desired
isoelectronic species?
84. An unusual category of acids known as superacids, which are deﬁned as any acid stronger than 100% sulfuric acid, can be prepared by seemingly simple reactions similar to the one below. In
this example, the reaction of anhydrous HF with SbF5 produces
the superacid [H2F][SbF6]:
2HF1l2  SbF5 1l2 S 3H2F4  3SbF6 4  1l2
a. What are the molecular structures of all species in this reaction? What are the hybridizations of the central atoms in each
species?
b. What mass of [H2F][SbF6] can be prepared when 2.93 mL
of anhydrous HF (density  0.975 g/mL) and 10.0 mL of SbF5
(density  3.10 g/mL) are allowed to react?
85. Determine the molecular structure and hybridization of the central
atom X in the polyatomic ion XY3 given the following information: A neutral atom of X contains 36 electrons, and the element
Y makes an anion with a 1– charge, which has the electron
conﬁguration 1s22s22p6.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

10 Liquids and Solids
Contents
10.1
•
•
10.2
•
10.3
•
•
10.4
•
•
10.5
•
•
10.6
10.7
10.8
•
•
10.9
•
•

Intermolecular Forces
Dipole–Dipole Forces
London Dispersion Forces
The Liquid State
Structural Model for Liquids
An Introduction to
Structures and Types of
Solids
X-Ray Analysis of Solids
Types of Crystalline Solids
Structure and Bonding in
Metals
Bonding Models for Metals
Metal Alloys
Carbon and Silicon: Network
Atomic Solids
Ceramics
Semiconductors
Molecular Solids
Ionic Solids
Vapor Pressure and Changes
of State
Vapor Pressure
Changes of State
Phase Diagrams
Applications of the Phase
Diagram for Water
The Phase Diagram for
Carbon Dioxide

Karst formation in Phang Nga Bay, Thailand at sunset. The Karst is limestone that has eroded into
these formations rising out of the sea.

424

Y

ou have only to think about water to appreciate how different the three states of
matter are. Flying, swimming, and ice skating are all done in contact with water in its
various forms. Clearly, the arrangements of the water molecules must be signiﬁcantly
different in its gas, liquid, and solid forms.
In Chapter 5 we saw that a gas can be pictured as a substance whose component particles are far apart, are in rapid random motion, and exert relatively small forces on each
other. The kinetic molecular model was constructed to account for the ideal behavior that
most gases approach at high temperatures and low pressures.
Solids are obviously very different from gases. A gas has low density and high compressibility and completely ﬁlls its container. Solids have much greater densities, are
compressible only to a very slight extent, and are rigid—a solid maintains its shape irrespective of its container. These properties indicate that the components of a solid are close
together and exert large attractive forces on each other.
The properties of liquids lie somewhere between those of solids and gases but
not midway between, as can be seen from some of the properties of the three states
of water. For example, compare the enthalpy change for the melting of ice at 0°C
(the heat of fusion) with that for vaporizing liquid water at 100°C (the heat of
vaporization):
H2O1s2 ¡ H2O1l2
H2O1l2 ¡ H2O1g2

Visualization: Intermolecular
Forces: London Dispersion
Forces

¢H°fus  6.02 kJ/mol
¢H°vap  40.7 kJ/mol

These values show a much greater change in structure in going from the liquid to the
gaseous state than in going from the solid to the liquid state. This suggests that there are
extensive attractive forces among the molecules in liquid water, similar to but not as strong
as those in the solid state.
The relative similarity of the liquid and solid states also can be seen in the densities of the three states of water. As shown in Table 10.1, the densities for liquid and
solid water are quite close.* Compressibilities also can be used to explore the relationship among water’s states. At 25°C, the density of liquid water changes from 0.99707
g/cm3 at a pressure of 1 atm to 1.046 g/cm3 at 1065 atm. Given the large change in pressure, this is a very small variation in the density. Ice also shows little variation in density with increased pressure. On the other hand, at 400°C, the density of gaseous water
changes from 3.26  104 g/cm3 at 1 atm pressure to 0.157 g/cm3 at 242 atm—a huge
variation.
The conclusion is clear. The liquid and solid states show many similarities and
are strikingly different from the gaseous state, as shown schematically in Fig. 10.1.
We must bear this in mind as we develop models for the structures of solids and
liquids.
We will proceed in our study of liquids and solids by ﬁrst considering the properties
and structures of liquids and solids. Then we will consider the changes in state that occur between solid and liquid, liquid and gas, and solid and gas.

*Although the densities of solid and liquid water are quite similar, as is typical for most substances, water
is quite unusual in that the density of its solid state is slightly less than that of its liquid state. For most
substances, the density of the solid state is slightly greater than that of the liquid state.

425

426

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

TABLE 10.1 Densities of the
Three States of Water
Density
(g/cm3)

State
Solid (0C,
1 atm)
Liquid (25C,
1 atm)
Gas (400C,
1 atm)

0.9168
0.9971

Gas

10.1

Remember that temperature is a measure of the random motions of the particles in a substance.

Dipole–dipole forces are forces that act
between polar molecules.

Visualization: Intermolecular
Forces: Dipole–Dipole Forces

Visualization: Intermolecular
Forces: Hydrogen Bonding
Forces

Solid

FIGURE 10.1
Schematic representations of the three states of matter.

3.26  104

Intermolecular forces were introduced
in Chapter 5 to explain nonideal gas
behavior.

Liquid

Intermolecular Forces

In Chapters 8 and 9 we saw that atoms can form stable units called molecules by sharing electrons. This is called intramolecular (within the molecule) bonding. In this chapter we consider the properties of the condensed states of matter (liquids and solids) and the forces that
cause the aggregation of the components of a substance to form a liquid or a solid. These
forces may involve covalent or ionic bonding, or they may involve weaker interactions usually called intermolecular forces (because they occur between, rather than within, molecules).
It is important to recognize that when a substance such as water changes from solid
to liquid to gas, the molecules remain intact. The changes in states are due to changes in
the forces among the molecules rather than in those within the molecules. In ice, as we
will see later in this chapter, the molecules are virtually locked in place, although they
can vibrate about their positions. If energy is added, the motions of the molecules increase,
and they eventually achieve the greater movement and disorder characteristic of liquid water. The ice has melted. As more energy is added, the gaseous state is eventually reached,
with the individual molecules far apart and interacting relatively little. However, the gas
still consists of water molecules. It would take much energy to overcome the covalent
bonds and decompose the water molecules into their component atoms. This can be seen
by comparing the energy needed to vaporize 1 mole of liquid water (40.7 kJ) with that
needed to break the OOH bonds in 1 mole of water molecules (934 kJ).

Dipole–Dipole Forces
As we saw in Section 8.3, molecules with polar bonds often behave in an electric ﬁeld as
if they had a center of positive charge and a center of negative charge. That is, they exhibit
a dipole moment. Molecules with dipole moments can attract each other electrostatically by
lining up so that the positive and negative ends are close to each other, as shown in Fig.
10.2(a). This is called a dipole–dipole attraction. In a condensed state such as a liquid,
where many molecules are in close proximity, the dipoles ﬁnd the best compromise between
attraction and repulsion. That is, the molecules orient themselves to maximize the B,E
interactions and to minimize B,B and E,E interactions, as represented in Fig. 10.2(b).
Dipole–dipole forces are typically only about 1% as strong as covalent or ionic bonds,
and they rapidly become weaker as the distance between the dipoles increases. At low
pressures in the gas phase, where the molecules are far apart, these forces are relatively
unimportant.
Particularly strong dipole–dipole forces, however, are seen among molecules in which
hydrogen is bound to a highly electronegative atom, such as nitrogen, oxygen, or ﬂuorine.
Two factors account for the strengths of these interactions: the great polarity of the bond
and the close approach of the dipoles, allowed by the very small size of the hydrogen
atom. Because dipole–dipole attractions of this type are so unusually strong, they are given
a special name—hydrogen bonding. Figure 10.3 shows hydrogen bonding among water

10.1 Intermolecular Forces

–

+

–

H

+

H

H

(a)

H

H

–
–

–
+

H

–

+

+

–

–

–

Attraction
Repulsion

O

H

H

H

H

O

O
H

δ+

H

H

O
H

(b)

(a)

+

O
H

O
H

H

H

H

δ+

O

+

–
+

2δ –

O
H

O

+

+

H

H
O

O

427

FIGURE 10.3
(a) The polar water molecule. (b) Hydrogen bonding among water molecules. Note
that the small size of the hydrogen atom allows for close interactions.

(b)

FIGURE 10.2
(a) The electrostatic interaction of two
polar molecules. (b) The interaction of
many dipoles in a condensed state.

molecules, which occurs between the partially positive H atoms and the lone pairs on adjacent water molecules.
Hydrogen bonding has a very important effect on physical properties. For example,
the boiling points for the covalent hydrides of the elements in Groups 4A, 5A, 6A, and
7A are given in Fig. 10.4. Note that the nonpolar tetrahedral hydrides of Group 4A show
a steady increase in boiling point with molar mass (that is, in going down the group),
whereas, for the other groups, the lightest member has an unexpectedly high boiling point.
Why? The answer lies in the especially large hydrogen bonding interactions that exist
among the smallest molecules with the most polar XOH bonds. These unusually strong
hydrogen bonding forces are due primarily to two factors. One factor is the relatively large
electronegativity values of the lightest elements in each group, which leads to especially
polar XOH bonds. The second factor is the small size of the ﬁrst element of each group,
which allows for the close approach of the dipoles, further strengthening the intermolecular forces. Because the interactions among the molecules containing the lightest elements
in Groups 5A and 6A are so strong, an unusually large quantity of energy must be supplied

100

H 2O
Group 6A

Boiling point (°C)

HF
0

H2Te
SbH 3
HI

Group 7A
NH 3

H 2S
Group 5A

–100

H 2Se
AsH3

HCl

HBr

PH 3

GeH 4

SnH 4

SiH 4
Group 4A

CH 4

FIGURE 10.4
The boiling points of the covalent hydrides
of the elements in Groups 4A, 5A, 6A,
and 7A.

–200

2

3

4
Period

5

428

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

Boiling point will be deﬁned precisely in
Section 10.8.

to overcome these interactions and separate the molecules to produce the gaseous state.
These molecules will remain together in the liquid state even at high temperatures—hence
the very high boiling points.
Hydrogen bonding is also important in organic molecules (molecules with a carbon
chain backbone). For example, the alcohols methanol (CH3OH) and ethanol (CH3CH2OH)
have much higher boiling points than would be expected from their molar masses because
of the polar OOH bonds in these molecules, which produce hydrogen bonding.

London Dispersion Forces

TABLE 10.2 The Freezing
Points of the Group 8A Elements
Element

Freezing Point (C)

Helium*
Neon
Argon
Krypton
Xenon

269.7
248.6
189.4
157.3
111.9

*Helium is the only element that will not
freeze by lowering its temperature at 1 atm.
Pressure must be applied to freeze helium.

Even molecules without dipole moments must exert forces on each other. We know this because all substances—even the noble gases—exist in the liquid and solid states under certain conditions. The forces that exist among noble gas atoms and nonpolar molecules are
called London dispersion forces. To understand the origin of these forces, let’s consider a
pair of noble gas atoms. Although we usually assume that the electrons of an atom are uniformly distributed about the nucleus, this is apparently not true at every instant. As the electrons move about the nucleus, a momentary nonsymmetrical electron distribution can develop that produces a temporary dipolar arrangement of charge. The formation of this
temporary dipole can, in turn, affect the electron distribution of a neighboring atom. That
is, this instantaneous dipole that occurs accidentally in a given atom can then induce a similar dipole in a neighboring atom, as represented in Fig. 10.5(a). This phenomenon leads to
an interatomic attraction that is relatively weak and short-lived but that can be very significant especially for large atoms (see below). For these interactions to become strong enough
to produce a solid, the motions of the atoms must be greatly slowed down. This explains,
for instance, why the noble gas elements have such low freezing points (see Table 10.2).
Note from Table 10.2 that the freezing point rises going down the group. The principal cause for this trend is that as the atomic number increases, the number of electrons
increases, and there is an increased chance of the occurrence of momentary dipole interactions. We describe this phenomenon using the term polarizability, which indicates the

+

+

H

Atom A
Atom B
No polarization
δ–

H

Molecule A
Molecule B
No polarization

δ–

+

δ–

δ+

+
Atom A

δ–

δ+
H

Atom A
Atom B
Instantaneous dipole on atom A
induces a dipole on atom B

(a)

H

δ+

+

FIGURE 10.5
(a) An instantaneous polarization can occur
on atom A, creating an instantaneous dipole. This dipole creates an induced dipole
on neighboring atom B. (b) Nonpolar molecules such as H2 also can develop instantaneous and induced dipoles.

H

δ+

+
Atom B

H

H

H

Molecule A
Molecule B
Instantaneous dipole on molecule A
induces a dipole on molecule B

δ–

δ+
H

H

Molecule A
(b)

δ–

δ+
H

H

Molecule B

10.2 The Liquid State

The dispersion forces in molecules with
large atoms are quite signiﬁcant and are
often actually more important than
dipole–dipole forces.

ease with which the electron “cloud” of an atom can be distorted to give a dipolar charge
distribution. Thus we say that large atoms with many electrons exhibit a higher polarizability than small atoms. This means that the importance of London dispersion forces increases greatly as the size of the atom increases.
These same ideas also apply to nonpolar molecules such as H2, CH4, CCl4, and CO2
[see Fig. 10.5(b)]. Since none of these molecules has a permanent dipole moment, their
principal means of attracting each other is through London dispersion forces.

10.2

For a given volume, a sphere has a
smaller surface area than any other
shape.
Surface tension: The resistance of a
liquid to an increase in its surface area.
The composition of glass is discussed in
Section 10.5.

Viscosity: A measure of a liquid’s resistance to ﬂow.

Surface

FIGURE 10.6
A molecule in the interior of a liquid is
attracted by the molecules surrounding it,
whereas a molecule at the surface of a
liquid is attracted only by molecules below
it and on each side.

429

The Liquid State

Liquids and liquid solutions are vital to our lives. Of course, water is the most important
liquid. Besides being essential to life, water provides a medium for food preparation, for
transportation, for cooling in many types of machines and industrial processes, for recreation, for cleaning, and for a myriad of other uses.
Liquids exhibit many characteristics that help us understand their nature. We have already
mentioned their low compressibility, lack of rigidity, and high density compared with gases.
Many of the properties of liquids give us direct information about the forces that exist among
the particles. For example, when a liquid is poured onto a solid surface, it tends to bead as
droplets, a phenomenon that depends on the intermolecular forces. Although molecules in the
interior of the liquid are completely surrounded by other molecules, those at the liquid surface are subject to attractions only from the side and from below (Fig. 10.6). The effect of
this uneven pull on the surface molecules tends to draw them into the body of the liquid and
causes a droplet of liquid to assume the shape that has the minimum surface area—a sphere.
To increase a liquid’s surface area, molecules must move from the interior of the liquid to the surface. This requires energy, since some intermolecular forces must be overcome. The resistance of a liquid to an increase in its surface area is called the surface
tension of the liquid. As we would expect, liquids with relatively large intermolecular
forces, such as those with polar molecules, tend to have relatively high surface tensions.
Polar liquids typically exhibit capillary action, the spontaneous rising of a liquid in a
narrow tube. Two different types of forces are responsible for this property: cohesive forces,
the intermolecular forces among the molecules of the liquid, and adhesive forces, the forces
between the liquid molecules and their container. We have already seen how cohesive forces
operate among polar molecules. Adhesive forces occur when a container is made of a substance that has polar bonds. For example, a glass surface contains many oxygen atoms with
partial negative charges that are attractive to the positive end of a polar molecule such as
water. This ability of water to “wet” glass makes it creep up the walls of the tube where the
water surface touches the glass. This, however, tends to increase the surface area of the water, which is opposed by the cohesive forces that try to minimize the surface. Thus, because
water has both strong cohesive (intermolecular) forces and strong adhesive forces to glass,
it “pulls itself” up a glass capillary tube (a tube with a small diameter) to a height where
the weight of the column of water just balances the water’s tendency to be attracted to the
glass surface. The concave shape of the meniscus (see Fig. 10.7) shows that water’s adhesive forces toward the glass are stronger than its cohesive forces. A nonpolar liquid such as
mercury (see Fig. 10.7) shows a convex meniscus. This behavior is characteristic of a liquid in which the cohesive forces are stronger than the adhesive forces toward glass.
Another property of liquids strongly dependent on intermolecular forces is viscosity,
a measure of a liquid’s resistance to ﬂow. As might be expected, liquids with large intermolecular forces tend to be highly viscous. For example, glycerol, whose structure is

430

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

FIGURE 10.7
Nonpolar liquid mercury forms a convex meniscus in a
glass tube, whereas polar water forms a concave meniscus.

Beads of water on a waxed car ﬁnish. The nonpolar component of the wax causes
the water to form approximately spherical droplets.

has an unusually high viscosity due mainly to its high capacity to form hydrogen bonds
using its OOH groups (see margin).
Molecular complexity also leads to higher viscosity because very large molecules can
become entangled with each other. For example, gasoline, a nonviscous liquid, contains
hydrocarbon molecules of the type CH3O(CH2)nOCH3, where n varies from about 3 to
8. However, grease, which is very viscous, contains much larger hydrocarbon molecules
in which n varies from 20 to 25.
Glycerol

Structural Model for Liquids
In many respects, the development of a structural model for liquids presents greater challenges than the development of such a model for the other two states of matter. In the
gaseous state the particles are so far apart and are moving so rapidly that intermolecular
forces are negligible under most circumstances. This means that we can use a relatively
simple model for gases. In the solid state, although the intermolecular forces are large,
the molecular motions are minimal, and fairly simple models are again possible. The liquid state, however, has both strong intermolecular forces and signiﬁcant molecular
motions. Such a situation precludes the use of really simple models for liquids. Recent
advances in spectroscopy, the study of the manner in which substances interact with
electromagnetic radiation, make it possible to follow the very rapid changes that occur in
liquids. As a result, our models of liquids are becoming more accurate. As a starting point,
a typical liquid might best be viewed as containing a large number of regions where the
arrangements of the components are similar to those found in the solid, but with more
disorder, and a smaller number of regions where holes are present. The situation is highly
dynamic, with rapid ﬂuctuations occurring in both types of regions.

10.3

An Introduction to Structures and Types of Solids

There are many ways to classify solids, but the broadest categories are crystalline solids,
those with a highly regular arrangement of their components, and amorphous solids, those
with considerable disorder in their structures.

10.3 An Introduction to Structures and Types of Solids

431

FIGURE 10.8
Two crystalline solids: pyrite (left), amethyst (right).

The regular arrangement of the components of a crystalline solid at the microscopic
level produces the beautiful, characteristic shapes of crystals, such as those shown in
Fig. 10.8. The positions of the components in a crystalline solid are usually represented
by a lattice, a three-dimensional system of points designating the positions of the components (atoms, ions, or molecules) that make up the substance. The smallest repeating
unit of the lattice is called the unit cell. Thus a particular lattice can be generated by
repeating the unit cell in all three dimensions to form the extended structure. Three common unit cells and their lattices are shown in Fig. 10.9. Note from Fig. 10.9 that the
extended structure in each case can be viewed as a series of repeating unit cells that share
common faces in the interior of the solid.
Although we will concentrate on crystalline solids in this book, there are many important noncrystalline (amorphous) materials. An example is common glass, which is best
pictured as a solution in which the components are “frozen in place” before they can
achieve an ordered arrangement. Although glass is a solid (it has a rigid shape), a great
deal of disorder exists in its structure.

X-Ray Analysis of Solids
The structures of crystalline solids are most commonly determined by X-ray diffraction.
Diffraction occurs when beams of light are scattered from a regular array of points in
which the spacings between the components are comparable with the wavelength of the
light. Diffraction is due to constructive interference when the waves of parallel beams are
in phase and to destructive interference when the waves are out of phase.
When X rays of a single wavelength are directed at a crystal, a diffraction pattern is
obtained, as we saw in Fig. 7.5. The light and dark areas on the photographic plate occur
because the waves scattered from various atoms may reinforce or cancel each other (see
Fig. 10.10). The key to whether the waves reinforce or cancel is the difference in distance
traveled by the waves after they strike the atoms. The waves are in phase before they are
reﬂected, so if the difference in distance traveled is an integral number of wavelengths,
the waves will still be in phase.
Since the distance traveled depends on the distance between the atoms, the diffraction
pattern can be used to determine the interatomic spacings. The exact relationship can be
worked out using the diagram in Fig. 10.11, which shows two in-phase waves being reﬂected
by atoms in two different layers in a crystal. The extra distance traveled by the lower wave
is the sum of the distances xy and yz, and the waves will be in phase after reﬂection if
xy  yz  nl
(10.1)

432

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids
Unit cell

Lattice

Space-filling unit cell

Example

Polonium
metal

(a)

Simple cubic

Uranium
metal

(b)

Body-centered cubic

Gold
metal

(c)

Face-centered cubic

FIGURE 10.9
Three cubic unit cells and the corresponding lattices. Note that only parts of spheres on the corners and faces of the unit cells reside inside the
unit cell, as shown by the “cutoff” versions.

where n is an integer and ␭ is the wavelength of the X rays. Using trigonometry (see
Fig. 10.11), we can show that
xy  yz  2d sin u
(10.2)
where d is the distance between the atoms and ␪ is the angle of incidence and reﬂection.
Combining Equation (10.1) and Equation (10.2) gives
nl  2d sin u
(10.3)
Equation (10.3) is called the Bragg equation after William Henry Bragg (1862–1942) and
his son William Lawrence Bragg (1890–1972), who shared the Nobel Prize in physics in
1915 for their pioneering work in X-ray crystallography.

10.3 An Introduction to Structures and Types of Solids

In-phase
In-phase

433

Out of phase

In-phase

d2

d1
(a)

(b)

FIGURE 10.10
X rays scattered from two different atoms may reinforce (constructive interference) or cancel (destructive interference) one another. (a) Both the
incident rays and the reﬂected rays are also in phase. In this case, d1 is such that the difference in the distances traveled by the two rays is a
whole number of wavelengths. (b) The incident rays are in phase but the reﬂected rays are exactly out of phase. In this case d2 is such that the
difference in distances traveled by the two rays is an odd number of half wavelengths.

A diffractometer is a computer-controlled instrument used for carrying out the X-ray
analysis of crystals. It rotates the crystal with respect to the X-ray beam and collects the
data produced by the scattering of the X rays from the various planes of atoms in the crystal. The results are then analyzed by computer.
The techniques for crystal structure analysis have reached a level of sophistication that
allows the determination of very complex structures, such as those important in biological
systems. For example, the structures of several enzymes have been determined, thus enabling biochemists to understand how they perform their functions. We will explore this
topic further in Chapter 12. Using X-ray diffraction, we can gather data on bond lengths
and angles and in so doing can test the predictions of our models of molecular geometry.
Sample Exercise 10.1

Using the Bragg Equation
X rays of wavelength 1.54 Å were used to analyze an aluminum crystal. A reﬂection was
produced at u  19.3 degrees. Assuming n  1, calculate the distance d between the
planes of atoms producing this reﬂection.
Solution
To determine the distance between the planes, we use Equation (10.3) with n  1, ␭ 
1.54 Å, and ␪  19.3 degrees. Since 2d sin ␪  n␭,
d

11211.54 Å2
nl

 2.33 Å  233 pm
2 sin u
12210.33052

See Exercises 10.41 through 10.44.
Graduate student Maria Zhuravlera operating an X-ray diffractometer at Michigan
State University.

FIGURE 10.11
Reﬂection of X rays of wavelength ␭ from a
pair of atoms in two different layers of a
crystal. The lower wave travels an extra distance equal to the sum of xy and yz. If this
distance is an integral number of wavelengths (n ⫽ 1, 2, 3, . . .), the waves will
reinforce each other when they exit the
crystal.

Incident rays

Reflected rays

θ

θ
θ θ

x

d
z

y

434

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Smart Fluids
atter seems to be getting smarter these days. Increasingly, we have discovered materials that can remember
their initial shape after being deformed or can sense and respond to their environment. In particular, valuable new materials have been formulated whose properties can be changed
instantly by applying a magnetic or electric ﬁeld.
One example of such a substance is a ﬂuid whose ﬂow
characteristics (rheology) can be changed from free ﬂowing
to almost solid in about 0.01 second by the application of an
electromagnetic ﬁeld. This “magnetorheological” (MR) ﬂuid
was developed by Lord Corporation. Working in collaboration
with Delphi Corporation, the company is applying the ﬂuid
in suspension control of General Motors automobiles such as
Cadillacs and Corvettes. The so-called Magneride system has
sensors that monitor the road surface and provide information
about what suspension damping is needed. In response, a message is instantly sent to an electromagnetic coil in the shock
absorbers, which adjusts the viscosity of the MR ﬂuid to
provide continuously variable damping. The result: an amazingly smooth ride and unerring road-holding ability.
The MR ﬂuid is composed of a synthetic oil in which
particles of an iron-containing compound are suspended. When

M

Flow

Flow
H

Magnetic field off
Magnetic particles
flow randomly

Magnetic field on
Applied field (H )
creates structure that
increases viscosity

the magnetic ﬁeld is turned off, these particles ﬂow freely
in all directions (see the ﬁgure above). When the ﬁeld is
turned on, the particles aggregate into chains that line up
perpendicular to the ﬂow of the ﬂuid, thereby increasing its
viscosity in proportion to the strength of the applied ﬁeld.
Many other applications of MR ﬂuids besides auto suspensions are under development. For example, this technology
is being used in a prosthesis (see below) for above-the-knee
amputees, which gives them a more natural gait and improves
stair climbing. One very large-scale application is in Japan’s
National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation, where
an MR ﬂuid is being used in dampers to protect the building
against earthquake damage. Large MR-ﬂuid dampers are also
being used for stabilizing bridges such as the Dong Ting Lake
Bridge in China’s Hunan province to steady it in high winds.

This High Intelligence Prosthesis for the knee uses an MR ﬂuid damper to provide motion that closely
duplicates the natural movement of the knee joint.

10.3 An Introduction to Structures and Types of Solids

435

Types of Crystalline Solids

Buckminsterfullerene, C60, is a particular
member of the fullerene family.

There are many different types of crystalline solids. For example, although both sugar and
salt dissolve readily in water, the properties of the resulting solutions are quite different.
The salt solution readily conducts an electric current, whereas the sugar solution does not.
This behavior arises from the nature of the components in these two solids. Common salt
(NaCl) is an ionic solid; it contains Na  and Cl ions. When solid sodium chloride dissolves in the polar water, sodium and chloride ions are distributed throughout the resulting solution and are free to conduct electric current. Table sugar (sucrose), on the other
hand, is composed of neutral molecules that are dispersed throughout the water when the
solid dissolves. No ions are present, and the resulting solution does not conduct electricity. These examples illustrate two important types of solids: ionic solids, represented by
sodium chloride, and molecular solids, represented by sucrose. Ionic solids have ions at
the points of the lattice that describes the structure of the solid. A molecular solid, on the
other hand, has discrete covalently bonded molecules at each of its lattice points. Ice is a
molecular solid that has an H2O molecule at each point (see Fig. 10.12).
A third type of solid is represented by elements such as carbon (which exists in the forms
graphite, diamond, and the fullerenes), boron, silicon, and all metals. These substances all have
atoms at the lattice points that describe the structure of the solid. Therefore, we call solids of
this type atomic solids. Examples of these three types of solids are shown in Fig. 10.12.

Cl–
C
Diamond
(a)

H2O

Na+
Sodium chloride
(b)

Ice
(c)

FIGURE 10.12
Examples of three types of crystalline solids. Only part of the structure is shown in each case. (a) An atomic solid. (b) An ionic solid.
(c) A molecular solid. The dotted lines show the hydrogen bonding interactions among the polar water molecules.

436

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

TABLE 10.3

Classiﬁcation of Solids
Atomic Solids
Metallic

Network

Group 8A

Molecular Solids

Ionic Solids

Components That Occupy
the Lattice Points:

Metal
atoms

Nonmetal
atoms

Group 8A
atoms

Discrete molecules

Ions

Bonding:

Delocalized
covalent

Directional covalent
(leading to
giant molecules)

London
dispersion
forces

Dipole–dipole and/or
London dispersion
forces

Ionic

The internal forces in a solid determine
the properties of the solid.

To summarize, we ﬁnd it convenient to classify solids according to what type of component occupies the lattice points. This leads to the classiﬁcations atomic solids (atoms at
the lattice points), molecular solids (discrete, relatively small molecules at the lattice points),
and ionic solids (ions at the lattice points). In addition, atomic solids are placed into the
following subgroups based on the bonding that exists among the atoms in the solid: metallic solids, network solids, and Group 8A solids. In metallic solids, a special type of delocalized nondirectional covalent bonding occurs. In network solids, the atoms bond to each
other with strong directional covalent bonds that lead to giant molecules, or networks,
of atoms. In the Group 8A solids, the noble gas elements are attracted to each other with
London dispersion forces. The classiﬁcation of solids is summarized in Table 10.3.
The markedly different bonding present in the various atomic solids leads to dramatically different properties for the resulting solids. For example, although argon, copper, and diamond all are atomic solids, they have strikingly different properties. Argon (a
Group 8A solid) has a very low melting point 1189°C2, whereas diamond (a network
solid) and copper (a metallic solid) melt at high temperatures (about 3500 and 1083°C,
respectively). Copper is an excellent conductor of electricity, whereas argon and diamond
are both insulators. Copper can be easily changed in shape; it is both malleable (can be
formed into thin sheets) and ductile (can be pulled into a wire). Diamond, on the other
hand, is the hardest natural substance known. We will explore the structure and bonding
of atomic solids in the next two sections.

10.4

The closest packing model for metallic
crystals assumes that metal atoms are
uniform, hard spheres.

Visualization: Electron Sea
Model

Structure and Bonding in Metals

Metals are characterized by high thermal and electrical conductivity, malleability, and ductility. As we will see, these properties can be traced to the nondirectional covalent bonding found in metallic crystals.
A metallic crystal can be pictured as containing spherical atoms packed together and
bonded to each other equally in all directions. We can model such a structure by packing
uniform, hard spheres in a manner that most efﬁciently uses the available space. Such an
arrangement is called closest packing. The spheres are packed in layers, as shown in
Fig. 10.13, in which each sphere is surrounded by six others. In the second layer the
spheres do not lie directly over those in the ﬁrst layer. Instead, each one occupies an
indentation (or dimple) formed by three spheres in the ﬁrst layer. In the third layer the
spheres can occupy the dimples of the second layer in two possible ways: They can occupy
positions so that each sphere in the third layer lies directly over a sphere in the ﬁrst layer
(the aba arrangement; Fig. 10.13a), or they can occupy positions so that no sphere in the
third layer lies over one in the ﬁrst layer (the abc arrangement; Fig. 10.13b).
The aba arrangement has the hexagonal unit cell shown in Fig. 10.14, and the resulting
structure is called the hexagonal closest packed (hcp) structure. The abc arrangement
has a face-centered cubic unit cell, as shown in Fig. 10.15, and the resulting structure is

10.4 Structure and Bonding in Metals
(a) abab — Closest packing

FIGURE 10.13
The closest packing arrangement of uniform spheres. In each layer a given sphere
is surrounded by six others, creating six
dimples, only three of which can be occupied in the next layer. (a) aba packing: The
second layer is like the ﬁrst, but it is displaced so that each sphere in the second
layer occupies a dimple in the ﬁrst layer.
The spheres in the third layer occupy dimples in the second layer so that the spheres
in the third layer lie directly over those in
the ﬁrst layer (aba). (b) abc packing: The
spheres in the third layer occupy dimples in
the second layer so that no spheres in the
third layer lie above any in the ﬁrst layer
(abc). The fourth layer is like the ﬁrst.

Top view

Top view

Side view

(b) abca — Closest packing

Top view

Top view

Top view

Side view

a
Side view

b

FIGURE 10.14
When spheres are closest packed so that
the spheres in the third layer are directly
over those in the ﬁrst layer (aba), the unit
cell is the hexagonal prism illustrated here
in red.

a

Top view

Atom in third layer
lies over atom in
first layer.

a

c

b

c

a

b

a

a

FIGURE 10.15
When spheres are packed in the abc
arrangement, the unit cell is face-centered
cubic. To make the cubic arrangement easier to see, the vertical axis has been tilted
as shown.

An atom in every
fourth layer lies
over an atom in
the first layer.

Unit cell

Unit cell

437

438

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Seething Surfaces
hen we picture a solid, we think of the particles as being packed closely together with relatively little motion. The particles are thought to vibrate randomly about
their positions but stay in nearly the same place. Recent research, however, indicates surface particles are a great deal
more mobile than was previously thought. Independent
teams of scientists from the University of Leiden in the
Netherlands and Sandia National Laboratory in New Mexico
have found a surprising amount of atom-swapping occurring
on the surface of a copper crystal.
The Dutch scientist Raoul van Gastel and his colleagues
used a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) to study the
surface of a copper crystal containing indium atom impurities. They noted that a given patch of surface would stay the
same for several scans and then, suddenly, the indium atoms
would appear at different places. Surprisingly, the indium
atoms seemed to make “long jumps,” moving as many as
ﬁve atom positions between scans. The most likely explanation for these movements is a “hole” created by a copper
atom escaping the surface. This hole moves around as other
atoms shift to ﬁll it in succession (see accompanying ﬁgure). The best analogy to the movement of the hole is the
toy slide puzzle with 15 numbered pieces and one missing

W

piece in a 4  4 array. The object of the game is to slide a
piece into the hole and then repeat the process until the numbers appear in order.
The hole on the copper surface moves very fast—up to
100 million times per second—shufﬂing copper atoms and
allowing the indium atoms to change positions. Van Gastel
believes that all of the observed motion results from just
a few fast-moving holes. In fact, he suggests that just one
in 6 billion copper atoms is missing at a given time, analogous to one person in the entire earth’s population. Its
absence causes a given atom on the surface to move every
30 or 40 seconds. Brian Swartzentruber of Sandia National
Laboratories came to similar conclusions using an STM
to track the movement of palladium atoms on a copper
surface.
These results have important implications. For example, metal surfaces are often used to speed up particular reactions. The motions on the metal surface could signiﬁcantly
inﬂuence the way that reactants interact with the surface.
Also, a lot of effort is now being expended to construct tiny
“machines” (called nanoscale devices) by assembling individual atoms on a solid surface. These devices could be literally torn apart by excess surface motions.

A section of a surface containing copper atoms
(red) and an indium atom (yellow). A hole due
to a missing copper atom is shown on the left.
The blue line on the right shows the movement
of this hole. As an atom moves to ﬁll the hole,
the hole moves as well. In the process, the
indium atom jumps to a new position.

A toy slide puzzle.

10.4 Structure and Bonding in Metals

9

b

a

b

8

7

5

4

1

2

6

3

10

12
11

hcp

FIGURE 10.16
The indicated sphere has 12 nearest
neighbors.

Sample Exercise 10.2

439

called the cubic closest packed (ccp) structure. Note that in the hcp structure the spheres
in every other layer occupy the same vertical position (ababab . . .), whereas in the ccp
structure the spheres in every fourth layer occupy the same vertical position (abcabca . . .).
A characteristic of both structures is that each sphere has 12 equivalent nearest neighbors:
6 in the same layer, 3 in the layer above, and 3 in the layer below (that form the dimples).
This is illustrated for the hcp structure in Fig. 10.16.
Knowing the net number of spheres (atoms) in a particular unit cell is important
for many applications involving solids. To illustrate how to ﬁnd the net number of
spheres in a unit cell, we will consider a face-centered cubic unit cell (Fig. 10.17).
Note that this unit cell is deﬁned by the centers of the spheres on the cube’s corners.
Thus 8 cubes share a given sphere, so 18 of this sphere lies inside each unit cell. Since
a cube has 8 corners, there are 8  18 pieces, or enough to put together 1 whole sphere.
The spheres at the center of each face are shared by 2 unit cells, so 21 of each lies inside a particular unit cell. Since the cube has 6 faces, we have 6  12 pieces, or enough
to construct 3 whole spheres. Thus the net number of spheres in a face-centered cubic
unit cell is
1
1
a8  b  a6  b  4
8
2

Calculating the Density of a Closest Packed Solid
Silver crystallizes in a cubic closest packed structure. The radius of a silver atom is 144 pm.
Calculate the density of solid silver.
Solution
Density is mass per unit volume. Thus we need to know how many silver atoms occupy
a given volume in the crystal. The structure is cubic closest packed, which means the unit
cell is face-centered cubic, as shown in the accompanying ﬁgure.
We must ﬁnd the volume of this unit cell for silver and the net number of atoms
it contains. Note that in this structure the atoms touch along the diagonals for each

1
2

(a)

(b)

(c)

1
8

atom

atom

FIGURE 10.17
The net number of spheres in a face-centered cubic unit cell. (a) Note that the sphere on a corner of the colored cell is shared with 7 other unit cells (a total of 8). Thus 18 of such a sphere lies within a given unit cell.
Since there are 8 corners in a cube, there are 8 of these 81 pieces, or 1 net sphere. (b) The sphere on the center of each face is shared by 2 unit cells, and thus each unit cell has 21 of each of these types of spheres.
There are 6 of these 12 spheres to give 3 net spheres. (c) Thus the face-centered cubic unit cell contains 4 net
spheres (all of the pieces can be assembled to give 4 spheres).

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

440

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids
face and not along the edges of the cube. Thus the length of the diagonal is r + 2r +
r, or 4r. We use this fact to ﬁnd the length of the edge of the cube by the Pythagorean
theorem:

r
4r

d 2  d 2  14r2 2
2d 2  16r 2
d 2  8r 2
d  28r 2  r 28

d

2r
r
d

d

Since r  144 pm for a silver atom,
4r

d  1144 pm21 182  407 pm

d

The volume of the unit cell is d3, which is (407 pm)3, or 6.74  107 pm3. We convert this
to cubic centimeters as follows:
d

6.74  107 pm3  a

1.00  1010 cm 3
b  6.74  1023 cm3
pm

Since we know that the net number of atoms in the face-centered cubic unit cell is 4,
we have 4 silver atoms contained in a volume of 6.74  10 23 cm3. The density is
therefore
14 atoms21107.9 g/mol211 mol 6.022  1023 atoms2
mass

volume
6.74  1023 cm3
 10.6 g/cm3

Density 

See Exercises 10.45 through 10.48.

Crystalline silver contains cubic closest
packed silver atoms.

Examples of metals that form cubic closest packed solids are aluminum, iron, copper, cobalt, and nickel. Magnesium and zinc are hexagonal closest packed. Calcium and
certain other metals can crystallize in either of these structures. Some metals, however,
assume structures that are not closest packed. For example, the alkali metals have structures characterized by a body-centered cubic (bcc) unit cell (see Fig. 10.9), where the
spheres touch along the body diagonal of the cube. In this structure, each sphere has 8 nearest neighbors (count the number of atoms around the atom at the center of the unit cell),
as compared with 12 in the closest packed structures. Why a particular metal adopts the
structure it does is not well understood.

Bonding Models for Metals
Malleable: Can be pounded into thin
sheets.
Ductile: Can be drawn to form a wire.

Any successful bonding model for metals must account for the typical physical properties of metals: malleability, ductility, and the efﬁcient and uniform conduction of heat and
electricity in all directions. Although the shapes of most pure metals can be changed relatively easily, most metals are durable and have high melting points. These facts indicate
that the bonding in most metals is both strong and nondirectional. That is, although it is
difﬁcult to separate metal atoms, it is relatively easy to move them, provided the atoms
stay in contact with each other.
The simplest picture that explains these observations is the electron sea model,
which envisions a regular array of metal cations in a “sea” of valence electrons (see
Fig. 10.18). The mobile electrons can conduct heat and electricity, and the metal ions
can be easily moved around as the metal is hammered into a sheet or pulled into a
wire.

441

10.4 Structure and Bonding in Metals

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Closest Packing of M & Ms
scientists speculate that because the ellipsoids can tip and rotate in ways that spheres cannot, they can pack more closely
to their neighbors.
According to Torquato, these results are important because they will help us better understand the properties of
disordered materials ranging from powders to glassy solids.
He also says that M & Ms make ideal test objects because
they are inexpensive and uniform and “you can eat the
experiment afterward.”

lthough we usually think of scientists as dealing with esoteric and often toxic materials, sometimes they surprise
us. For example, scientists at several prestigious universities
have lately shown a lot of interest in M & M candies.
To appreciate the scientists’ interest in M & Ms, we must
consider the importance of packing atoms, molecules, or microcrystals in understanding the structures of solids. The most
efﬁcient use of space is the closest packing of uniform
spheres, where 74% of the space is occupied by the spheres
and 26% of space is left unoccupied. Although the structures
of most pure metals can be explained in terms of closest
packing, most other substances—such as many alloys and
ceramics—consist of random arrays of microscopic particles.
For this reason, it is of interest to study how such objects
pack in a random way.
When uniform spheres, such as marbles, are poured into
a large container, the resulting random packing of the spheres
results in only 64% of the space being occupied by the
spheres. Thus it was very surprising when Princeton University chemist Salvatore Torquato and his colleagues at
Cornell and North Carolina Central Universities discovered
that, when the ellipsoidal-shaped M & Ms are poured into
a large container, the candies occupy 73.5% of the available
space. In other words, the randomly packed M & Ms occupy
space with almost the same efﬁciency as closest packed
spheres do.
Why do randomly packed ellipsoids occupy space so
much more efﬁciently than randomly packed spheres? The

A

A related model that gives a more detailed view of the electron energies and motions
is the band model, or molecular orbital (MO) model, for metals. In this model, the electrons are assumed to travel around the metal crystal in molecular orbitals formed from the
valence atomic orbitals of the metal atoms (Fig. 10.19).
Recall that in the MO model for the gaseous Li2 molecule (Section 9.3), two
widely spaced molecular orbital energy levels (bonding and antibonding) result
when two identical atomic orbitals interact. However, when many metal atoms interact,
e–
+
e–

FIGURE 10.18
The electron sea model for metals postulates a regular array of cations in a “sea” of
valence electrons. (a) Representation of an
alkali metal (Group 1A) with one valence
electron. (b) Representation of an alkaline
earth metal (Group 2A) with two valence
electrons.

+

e–

(a)

+

e–
e–

e–

e–
+

+

+
e–

+

e–

+

e–

2+
e–

(b)

e–

e–

e–

e–
2+

e–
2+

e–

2+

e–

e–
2+

e–

e–
2+

2+
e–

2+

e–
e–

442

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids
Number of interacting atomic orbitals
4

16

6.02 × 10 23

Energy

2

FIGURE 10.19
The molecular orbital energy levels produced when various numbers of atomic
orbitals interact. Note that for two atomic
orbitals two rather widely spaced energy
levels result. (Recall the description of H2
in Section 9.2.) As more atomic orbitals are
available to form molecular orbitals, the
resulting energy levels are more closely
spaced, ﬁnally producing a band of very
closely spaced orbitals.

Metal Alloys
Because of the nature of the structure and bonding of metals, other elements can be introduced into a metallic crystal relatively easily to produce substances called alloys. An
alloy is best deﬁned as a substance that contains a mixture of elements and has metallic
properties. Alloys can be conveniently classiﬁed into two types.

Empty MOs

3p
3s
Energy

as in a metal crystal, the large number of resulting molecular orbitals become more
closely spaced and ﬁnally form a virtual continuum of levels, called bands, as shown
in Fig. 10.19.
As an illustration, picture a magnesium metal crystal, which has an hcp structure.
Since each magnesium atom has one 3s and three 3p valence atomic orbitals, a crystal
with n magnesium atoms has available n(3s) and 3n(3p) orbitals to form the molecular
orbitals, as illustrated in Fig. 10.20. Note that the core electrons are localized, as shown
by their presence in the energy “well” around each magnesium atom. However, the
valence electrons occupy closely spaced molecular orbitals, which are only partially
ﬁlled.
The existence of empty molecular orbitals close in energy to ﬁlled molecular orbitals
explains the thermal and electrical conductivity of metal crystals. Metals conduct electricity
and heat very efﬁciently because of the availability of highly mobile electrons. For example, when an electric potential is placed across a strip of metal, for current to ﬂow,
electrons must be free to move. In the band model for metals, the electrons in partially
ﬁlled bonds are mobile. These conduction electrons are free to travel throughout the metal
crystal as dictated by the potential imposed on the metal. The molecular orbitals occupied
by these conducting electrons are called conduction bands. These mobile electrons also
account for the efﬁciency of the conduction of heat through metals. When one end of a
metal rod is heated, the mobile electrons can rapidly transmit the thermal energy to the
other end.

Filled MOs

2p

2s
1s
12+

12+

12+

12+

12+

Magnesium
atoms

FIGURE 10.20
(left) A representation of the energy levels (bands) in a magnesium crystal. The electrons in the 1s, 2s, and 2p orbitals are close to the nuclei
and thus are localized on each magnesium atom as shown. However, the 3s and 3p valence orbitals overlap and mix to form molecular orbitals.
Electrons in these energy levels can travel throughout the crystal. (right) Crystals of magnesium grown from a vapor.

10.4 Structure and Bonding in Metals

443

CHEMICAL IMPACT
What Sank the Titanic?
n April 12, 1912, the steamship Titanic struck an iceberg occlusions tend to make steel more brittle. This evidence
in the North Atlantic approximately 100 miles south of suggests that the quality of the steel used to make the hull
the Grand Banks of Newfoundland and within 3 hours was of the Titanic may very well have been an important factor
resting on the bottom of the ocean. Of her more than 2300 that led to the rapid sinking of the ship.
But—not so fast. The Titanic continues to provoke conpassengers and crew, over 1500 lost their lives. While the
tragic story of the Titanic has never faded from the minds troversy. A team of naval engineers and scientists recently
and imaginations of the generations that followed, the 1985 have concluded that it was not brittle steel but faulty rivets
discovery of the wreck by a joint Franco-American expedi- that doomed the Titanic. During expeditions in 1996 and
tion at a depth of 12,612 feet rekindled the world’s interest 1998 conducted by RMS Titanic, Inc., more samples of
in the “greatest oceangoing vessel” ever built. The discovery Titanic’s steel and rivets were obtained for further study.
also would reveal important scientiﬁc clues as to why and Analysis of these samples by a team headed by Tim Foecke
how the Titanic sank so quickly in the frigid waters of the of the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) shows that the rivets contain three times the expected
North Atlantic.
The Titanic was designed to be virtually “unsinkable,” amount of silicate slag. Foecke and his colleagues argue that
and even in the worst-case scenario, a head-on collision with the high slag content resulted in weak rivets that snapped in
another ocean liner, the ship was engineered to take from large numbers when the collision occurred, mortally woundone to three days to sink. Thus its quick trip to the bottom ing the ship.
What sank the Titanic? It hit an iceberg. The details rehas puzzled scientists for years. In 1991, Steve Blasco, an
ocean-ﬂoor geologist for the Canadian Department of Nat- main to be ﬁgured out.
ural Resources, led a scientiﬁc expedition to the wreck. On one of 17 dives to
the site, Blasco’s team recovered a piece
of steel that appeared to be a part of the
Titanic’s hull. Unlike modern steel,
which would have shown evidence of
bending in a collision, the steel recovered from the Titanic appeared to have
shattered on impact with the iceberg.
This suggested that the metal might not
have been as ductile (ductility is the ability to stretch without breaking) as it
should have been. In 1994, tests were
conducted on small pieces of metal,
called coupons, cut from the recovered
piece of hull. These samples shattered
without bending. Further analysis
showed that the steel used to construct
the hull of the Titanic was high in sulfur content, and it is known that sulfur Bow of the Titanic under 212 miles of water.

O

444

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

TABLE 10.4 The Composition of the Two Brands of Steel Tubing Commonly
Used to Make Lightweight Racing Bicycles
copper
zinc
Brass

Brand of Tubing
Reynolds
Columbus

%C

% Si

% Mn

% Mo

% Cr

0.25
0.25

0.25
0.30

1.3
0.65

0.20
0.20

—
1.0

(a)

iron
carbon

Steel
(b)

FIGURE 10.21
Two types of alloys.

Visualization: Homogeneous
Mixtures: Air and Brass

(a)

10.5

Diamond

Weak
bonding
between
layers

(b)

In a substitutional alloy some of the host metal atoms are replaced by other metal
atoms of similar size. For example, in brass, approximately one-third of the atoms in the
host copper metal have been replaced by zinc atoms, as shown in Fig. 10.21(a). Sterling
silver (93% silver and 7% copper), pewter (85% tin, 7% copper, 6% bismuth, and 2%
antimony), and plumber’s solder (95% tin and 5% antimony) are other examples of
substitutional alloys.
An interstitial alloy is formed when some of the interstices (holes) in the closest
packed metal structure are occupied by small atoms, as shown in Fig. 10.21(b). Steel,
the best-known interstitial alloy, contains carbon atoms in the holes of an iron crystal.
The presence of the interstitial atoms changes the properties of the host metal. Pure iron
is relatively soft, ductile, and malleable due to the absence of directional bonding. The
spherical metal atoms can be rather easily moved with respect to each other. However,
when carbon, which forms strong directional bonds, is introduced into an iron crystal,
the presence of the directional carbon–iron bonds makes the resulting alloy harder,
stronger, and less ductile than pure iron. The amount of carbon directly affects the properties of steel. Mild steels, containing less than 0.2% carbon, are ductile and malleable
and are used for nails, cables, and chains. Medium steels, containing 0.2 to 0.6% carbon,
are harder than mild steels and are used in rails and structural steel beams. High-carbon
steels, containing 0.6 to 1.5% carbon, are tough and hard and are used for springs, tools,
and cutlery.
Many types of steel also contain elements in addition to iron and carbon. Such steels
are often called alloy steels, and they can be viewed as being mixed interstitial (carbon)
and substitutional (other metals) alloys. Bicycle frames, for example, are constructed from
a wide variety of alloy steels. The compositions of the two brands of steel tubing most
commonly used in expensive racing bicycles are given in Table 10.4.

Graphite

FIGURE 10.22
The structures of diamond and graphite. In
each case only a small part of the entire
structure is shown.

Carbon and Silicon: Network Atomic Solids

Many atomic solids contain strong directional covalent bonds to form a solid that might
best be viewed as a “giant molecule.” We call these substances network solids. In contrast to metals, these materials are typically brittle and do not efﬁciently conduct heat or
electricity. To illustrate network solids, in this section we will discuss two very important
elements, carbon and silicon, and some of their compounds.
The two most common forms of carbon, diamond and graphite, are typical network
solids. In diamond, the hardest naturally occurring substance, each carbon atom is surrounded by a tetrahedral arrangement of other carbon atoms to form a huge molecule [see
Fig. 10.22(a)]. This structure is stabilized by covalent bonds, which, in terms of the
localized electron model, are formed by the overlap of sp3 hybridized carbon atomic
orbitals.
It is also useful to consider the bonding among the carbon atoms in diamond in terms
of the molecular orbital model. Energy-level diagrams for diamond and a typical metal
are given in Fig. 10.23. Recall that the conductivity of metals can be explained by

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

10.5 Carbon and Silicon: Network Atomic Solids

445

Empty MOs

E

E
Empty MOs
Filled MOs

Filled MOs
(b)

(a)

FIGURE 10.23
Partial representation of the molecular orbital energies in (a) diamond and (b) a typical metal.

Visualization: Network Solids

Graphite and diamond, two forms of
carbon.

C

C
C

C
C

C

C
C
C

C

C

C

C

C
C

C

C

C
C

(a)

postulating that electrons are excited from ﬁlled levels into the very near empty levels, or
conduction bands. However, note that in the energy-level diagram for diamond there is a
large gap between the ﬁlled and the empty levels. This means that electrons cannot be
transferred easily to the empty conduction bands. As a result, diamond is not expected to
be a good electrical conductor. In fact, this prediction of the model agrees exactly with
the observed behavior of diamond, which is known to be an electrical insulator—it does
not conduct an electric current.
Graphite is very different from diamond. While diamond is hard, basically colorless,
and an insulator, graphite is slippery, black, and a conductor. These differences, of course,
arise from the differences in bonding in the two types of solids. In contrast to the tetrahedral
arrangement of carbon atoms in diamond, the structure of graphite is based on layers of
carbon atoms arranged in fused six-membered rings, as shown in Fig. 10.22(b). Each carbon atom in a particular layer of graphite is surrounded by the three other carbon atoms
in a trigonal planar arrangement with 120-degree bond angles. The localized electron
model predicts sp2 hybridization in this case. The three sp2 orbitals on each carbon are
used to form ␴ bonds with three other carbon atoms. One 2p orbital remains unhybridized
on each carbon and is perpendicular to the plane of carbon atoms, as shown in Fig. 10.24.

C

C

C

C
C

C

(b)

FIGURE 10.24
The p orbitals (a) perpendicular to the plane of the carbon ring system in graphite can combine to form (b) an extensive
␲-bonding network.

446

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

FIGURE 10.25
Graphite consists of layers of carbon atoms.

Computer-generated model of silica.

These orbitals combine to form a group of closely spaced ␲ molecular orbitals that
are important in two ways. First, they contribute signiﬁcantly to the stability of the
graphite layers because of the ␲ bond formation. Second, the ␲ molecular orbitals with
their delocalized electrons account for the electrical conductivity of graphite. These
closely spaced orbitals are exactly analogous to the conduction bands found in metal
crystals.
Graphite is often used as a lubricant in locks (where oil is undesirable because it collects dirt). The slipperiness that is characteristic of graphite can be explained by noting
that graphite has very strong bonding within the layers of carbon atoms but little bonding
between the layers (the valence electrons are all used to form ␴ and ␲ bonds among carbons within the layers). This arrangement allows the layers to slide past one another quite
readily. Graphite’s layered structure is shown in Fig. 10.25. This is in contrast to diamond,
which has uniform bonding in all directions in the crystal.
Because of their extreme hardness, diamonds are used extensively in industrial cutting implements. Thus it is desirable to convert cheaper graphite to diamond. As we might
expect from the higher density of diamond (3.5 g/cm3) compared with that of graphite
(2.2 g/cm3), this transformation can be accomplished by applying very high pressures to
graphite. The application of 150,000 atm of pressure at 2800°C converts graphite virtually completely to diamond. The high temperature is required to break the strong bonds
in graphite so the rearrangement can occur.
Silicon is an important constituent of the compounds that make up the earth’s crust.
In fact, silicon is to geology as carbon is to biology. Just as carbon compounds are the
basis for most biologically signiﬁcant systems, silicon compounds are fundamental to
most of the rocks, sands, and soils found in the earth’s crust. However, although carbon
and silicon are next to each other in Group 4A of the periodic table, the carbon-based
compounds of biology and the silicon-based compounds of geology have markedly different structures. Carbon compounds typically contain long strings of carbon–carbon
bonds, whereas the most stable silicon compounds involve chains with silicon–oxygen
bonds.
The fundamental silicon–oxygen compound is silica, which has the empirical
formula SiO2. Knowing the properties of the similar compound carbon dioxide, one
might expect silica to be a gas that contains discrete SiO2 molecules. In fact, nothing
could be further from the truth—quartz and some types of sand are typical of the
materials composed of silica. What accounts for this difference? The answer lies in the
bonding.

10.5 Carbon and Silicon: Network Atomic Solids
The bonding in the CO2 molecule was described in Section 9.1.

O

O
Si

O

O

FIGURE 10.26
(top) The structure of quartz (empirical formula SiO2). Quartz contains chains of SiO4
tetrahedra (bottom) that share oxygen atoms.

SiO44–

Si2O76–

447

Recall that the Lewis structure of CO2 is

and that each C “ O bond can be viewed as a combination of a s bond involving a carbon
sp hybrid orbital and a p bond involving a carbon 2p orbital. On the contrary, silicon cannot use its valence 3p orbitals to form strong p bonds with oxygen, mainly because of
the larger size of the silicon atom and its orbitals, which results in less effective overlap
with the smaller oxygen orbitals. Therefore, instead of forming p bonds, the silicon atom
satisﬁes the octet rule by forming single bonds with four oxygen atoms, as shown in the
representation of the structure of quartz in Fig. 10.26. Note that each silicon atom is at
the center of a tetrahedral arrangement of oxygen atoms, which are shared with other silicon atoms. Although the empirical formula for quartz is SiO2, the structure is based on
a network of SiO4 tetrahedra with shared oxygen atoms rather than discrete SiO2 molecules. It is obvious that the differing abilities of carbon and silicon to form p bonds with
oxygen have profound effects on the structures and properties of CO2 and SiO2.
Compounds closely related to silica and found in most rocks, soils, and clays are the
silicates. Like silica, the silicates are based on interconnected SiO4 tetrahedra. However,
in contrast to silica, where the O/Si ratio is 2:1, silicates have O/Si ratios greater than 2:1
and contain silicon–oxygen anions. This means that to form the neutral solid silicates,
cations are needed to balance the excess negative charge. In other words, silicates are salts
containing metal cations and polyatomic silicon–oxygen anions. Examples of important
silicate anions are shown in Fig. 10.27.
When silica is heated above its melting point (about 1600°C) and cooled rapidly,
an amorphous solid called a glass results (see Fig. 10.28). Note that a glass contains

Si3O96–

(a)

(Si4O11)n6n–
Silicon
Oxygen

FIGURE 10.27
Examples of silicate anions, all of which are based on SiO44 tetrahedra.

(b)

FIGURE 10.28
Two-dimensional representations of (a) a
quartz crystal and (b) a quartz glass.

448

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

TABLE 10.5

Compositions of Some Common Types of Glass
Percentages of Various Components

Type of Glass

Window (soda-lime glass)
Cookware (aluminosilicate glass)
Heat-resistant (borosilicate glass)
Optical

SiO2

CaO

Na2O

B2O3

Al2O3

K2O

MgO

72
55
76
69

11
15
3
12

13
—
5
6

—
—
13
0.3

0.3
20
2
—

3.8
—
0.5
12

—
10
—
—

a good deal of disorder, in contrast to the crystalline nature of quartz. Glass more
closely resembles a very viscous solution than it does a crystalline solid. Common
glass results when substances such as Na2CO3 are added to the silica melt, which is
then cooled. The properties of glass can be varied greatly by varying the additives. For
example, addition of B2O3 produces a glass (called borosilicate glass) that expands and
contracts little under large temperature changes. Thus it is useful for labware and cooking utensils. The most common brand name for this glass is Pyrex. The addition of
K2O produces an especially hard glass that can be ground to the precise shapes needed
for eyeglass and contact lenses. The compositions of several types of glass are shown
in Table 10.5.

Ceramics
A glass pitcher being manufactured.

An artist paints a ceramic vase before
glazing.

Ceramics are typically made from clays (which contain silicates) and hardened by ﬁring
at high temperatures. Ceramics are nonmetallic materials that are strong, brittle, and
resistant to heat and attack by chemicals.
Like glass, ceramics are based on silicates, but with that the resemblance ends. Glass
can be melted and remelted as often as desired, but once a ceramic has been hardened, it
is resistant to extremely high temperatures. This behavior results from the very different
structures of glasses and ceramics. A glass is a homogeneous, noncrystalline “frozen solution,” and a ceramic is heterogeneous. A ceramic contains two phases: minute crystals
of silicates that are suspended in a glassy cement.
To understand how ceramics harden, it is necessary to know something about the
structure of clays. Clays are formed by the weathering action of water and carbon dioxide on the mineral feldspar, which is a mixture of silicates with empirical formulas
such as K2O  Al2O3  6SiO2 and Na2O  Al2O3  6SiO2. Feldspar is really an aluminosilicate in which aluminum as well as silicon atoms are part of the oxygen-bridged
polyanion. The weathering of feldspar produces kaolinite, consisting of tiny thin
platelets with the empirical formula Al2Si2O5(OH)4. When dry, the platelets cling
together; when water is present, they can slide over one another, giving clay its plasticity. As clay dries, the platelets begin to interlock again. When the remaining water
is driven off during ﬁring, the silicates and cations form a glass that binds the tiny
crystals of kaolinite.
Ceramics have a very long history. Rocks, which are natural ceramic materials,
served as the earliest tools. Later, clay vessels dried in the sun or baked in ﬁres
served as containers for food and water. These early vessels were no doubt crude and
quite porous. With the discovery of glazing, which probably occurred about 3000 B.C.
in Egypt, pottery became more serviceable as well as more beautiful. Prized porcelain is essentially the same material as crude earthenware, but specially selected
clays and glazings are used for porcelain and the clay object is ﬁred at a very high
temperature.

10.5 Carbon and Silicon: Network Atomic Solids

449

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Golﬁng with Glass
ou probably can guess what material traditionally was
used to construct the “woods” used in golf. Modern technology has changed things. Like the bats used in college
baseball, most “woods” are now made of metal. While bats
are made of aluminum, golf club heads are often made of
stainless steel or titanium.
Metals and their alloys usually form crystals that contain highly ordered arrangements of atoms. However, a company called Liquidmetal Golf of Laguna Niguel, California,
has begun producing golf clubs containing glass—metallic
glass. The company has found that when molten mixtures
of titanium, zirconium, nickel, beryllium, and copper are
cooled, they solidify, forming a glass. Unlike crystalline materials that contain a regular array of atoms, glasses are amorphous—the atoms are randomly scattered throughout the
solid.
These golf clubs with metallic glass inserts have some
unusual characteristics. Golfers who have tried the clubs say
they combine hardness with a “soft feel.” Studies show that
the glass transfers more of the energy of the golf swing to
the ball with less impact to the golfer’s hands than with regular metal woods.
One of the fortunate properties of this ﬁve-component
metallic glass (invented in 1992 by William L. Johnson and
Atakan Peker at the California Institute of Technology) is
that it can be cooled relatively slowly to form the glass. This
allows manufacture of relatively large glass objects such as
inserts for golf club heads. Most mixtures of metals that
form glasses must be cooled very rapidly to obtain the glass,
which results in tiny particles of glass leading to powders.

Y

Golf clubs with a titanium shell and
metallic glass inserts.

David S. Lee, head of manufacturing at Liquidmetal
Golf, says that golf clubs were an obvious ﬁrst application for this ﬁve-component glass because golfers are
used to paying high prices for clubs that employ new
technology. Liquidmetal Golf is now looking for other
applications of this new glass. How about glass bicycle
frames?

Although ceramics have been known since antiquity, they are not obsolete materials. On the contrary, ceramics constitute one of the most important classes of “high-tech”
materials. Because of their stability at high temperatures and resistance to corrosion,
ceramics seem an obvious choice for constructing jet and automobile engines in which
the greatest fuel efﬁciencies are possible at very high temperatures. But ceramics are
brittle—they break rather than bend—which limits their usefulness. However, more ﬂexible ceramics can be obtained by adding small amounts of organic polymers. Taking their
cue from natural “organoceramics” such as teeth and shells of sea creatures that contain
small amounts of organic polymers, materials scientists have found that incorporating
tiny amounts of long organic molecules into ceramics as they form produces materials
that are much less subject to fracture. These materials should be useful for lighter, more
durable engine parts, as well as for ﬂexible superconducting wire and microelectronic
devices. In addition, these organoceramics hold great promise for prosthetic devices such
as artiﬁcial bones.

450

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

Semiconductors
Visualization: Magnetic Levitation by a Superconductor

Si

Si
Si

Si

Si

Si
As
iS

Si
As

Si
Si
iS

Si
Si

Si
iS

Si

Si
n-type semiconductor
(a)
Si

Si

Si
Si

Si
Si

Si

Si
B

Si
Si

Si
Si

Si

Si

B
p-type semiconductor
(b)

FIGURE 10.29
(a) A silicon crystal doped with arsenic,
which has one more valence electron than
silicon. (b) A silicon crystal doped with
boron, which has one less electron than
silicon.

Electrons must be in singly occupied
molecular orbitals to conduct a current.

Elemental silicon has the same structure as diamond, as might be expected from its
position in the periodic table (in Group 4A directly under carbon). Recall that in
diamond there is a large energy gap between the ﬁlled and empty molecular orbitals
(see Fig. 10.23). This gap prevents excitation of electrons to the empty molecular
orbitals (conduction bands) and makes diamond an insulator. In silicon the situation is
similar, but the energy gap is smaller. A few electrons can cross the gap at 25°C, making silicon a semiconducting element, or semiconductor. In addition, at higher temperatures, where more energy is available to excite electrons into the conduction bands,
the conductivity of silicon increases. This is typical behavior for a semiconducting
element and is in contrast to that of metals, whose conductivity decreases with
increasing temperature.
The small conductivity of silicon can be enhanced at normal temperatures if the
silicon crystal is doped with certain other elements. For example, when a small
fraction of silicon atoms is replaced by arsenic atoms, each having one more valence
electron than silicon, extra electrons become available for conduction, as shown in Fig.
10.29(a). This produces an n-type semiconductor, a substance whose conductivity is
increased by doping it with atoms having more valence electrons than the atoms in the
host crystal. These extra electrons lie close in energy to the conduction bands and can
be easily excited into these levels, where they can conduct an electric current [see
Fig. 10.30(a)].
We also can enhance the conductivity of silicon by doping the crystal with an element such as boron, which has only three valence electrons, one less than silicon. Because
boron has one less electron than is required to form the bonds with the surrounding silicon
atoms, an electron vacancy, or hole, is created, as shown in Fig. 10.29(b). As an electron
ﬁlls this hole, it leaves a new hole, and this process can be repeated. Thus the hole advances through the crystal in a direction opposite to movement of the electrons jumping
to ﬁll the hole. Another way of thinking about this phenomenon is that in pure silicon
each atom has four valence electrons and the low-energy molecular orbitals are exactly
ﬁlled. Replacing silicon atoms with boron atoms leaves vacancies in these molecular
orbitals, as shown in Fig. 10.30(b). This means that there is only one electron in some of
the molecular orbitals, and these unpaired electrons can function as conducting electrons.
Thus the substance becomes a better conductor. When semiconductors are doped with
atoms having fewer valence electrons than the atoms of the host crystal, they are called
p-type semiconductors, so named because the positive holes can be viewed as the charge
carriers.
Most important applications of semiconductors involve connection of a p-type and an
n-type to form a p–n junction. Figure 10.31(a) shows a typical junction; the red dots

Empty MOs
(Conduction bands)

“Excess” valence
electrons (•) from
donor impurity

E

FIGURE 10.30
Energy-level diagrams for (a) an n-type
semiconductor and (b) a
p-type semiconductor.

Empty MOs
(Conduction bands)

Electron vacancies
( ) due to the
doping atoms

E

Filled
MOs

(a)

(b)

10.5 Carbon and Silicon: Network Atomic Solids

(–)

(a)

451

(+)

p

n

(–)

(+)

To negative
terminal
of battery

To positive
terminal
of battery
p

n

(b)

FIGURE 10.31
The p–n junction involves the contact of a
p-type and an n-type semiconductor. (a)
The charge carriers of the p-type region are
holes ( ). In the n-type region the charge
carriers are electrons ( ). (b) No current
ﬂows (reverse bias). (c) Current readily
ﬂows (forward bias). Note that each electron that crosses the boundary leaves a
hole behind. Thus the electrons and the
holes move in opposite directions.

(c)

Printed circuits are discussed in the
Chemical Impact feature on page 452.

represent excess electrons in the n-type semiconductor, and the white circles represent
holes (electron vacancies) in the p-type semiconductor. At the junction, a small number
of electrons migrate from the n-type region into the p-type region, where there are vacancies in the low-energy molecular orbitals. The effect of these migrations is to place a
negative charge on the p-type region (since it now has a surplus of electrons) and a positive charge on the n-type region (since it has lost electrons, leaving holes in its low-energy
molecular orbitals). This charge buildup, called the contact potential, or junction potential, prevents further migration of electrons.
Now suppose an external electric potential is applied by connecting the negative terminal of a battery to the p-type region and the positive terminal to the n-type region. The
situation represented in Fig. 10.31(b) results. Electrons are drawn toward the positive
terminal, and the resulting holes move toward the negative terminal—exactly opposite to
the natural ﬂow of electrons at the p–n junction. The junction resists the imposed current
ﬂow in this direction and is said to be under reverse bias. No current ﬂows through the
system.
On the other hand, if the battery is connected so that the negative terminal is connected to the n-type region and the positive terminal is connected to the p-type region
[Fig. 10.31(c)], the movement of electrons (and holes) is in the favored direction. The
junction has low resistance, and a current ﬂows easily. The junction is said to be under
forward bias.
A p–n junction makes an excellent rectiﬁer, a device that produces a pulsating
direct current (ﬂows in one direction) from alternating current (ﬂows in both directions
alternately). When placed in a circuit where the potential is constantly reversing, a
p–n junction transmits current only under forward bias, thus converting the alternating current to direct current. Radios, computers, and other electronic devices formerly

(+)

(–)

To positive
terminal
of battery

To negative
terminal
of battery
p

n

452

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Transistors and Printed Circuits
The voltage V, current I, and resistance R in a circuit
are related by the equation

ransistors have had an immense impact on the technology of electronic devices for which signal ampliﬁcation
is needed, such as communications equipment and computers. Before the invention of the transistor at Bell Laboratories in 1947, ampliﬁcation was provided exclusively by vacuum tubes, which were both bulky and unreliable. The ﬁrst
electronic digital computer, ENIAC, built at the University
of Pennsylvania, had 19,000 vacuum tubes and consumed
150,000 watts of electricity. Because of the discovery and
development of the transistor and the printed circuit, a handheld calculator run by a small battery now has the same computing power as ENIAC.
A junction transistor is made by joining n-type and
p-type semiconductors so as to form an n–p–n or a p–n–p
junction. The former type is shown in Fig. 10.32. In this diagram the input signal (to be ampliﬁed) occurs in circuit 1,
which has a small resistance and a forward-biased n–p junction (junction 1). As the voltage of the input signal to this
circuit varies, the current in the circuit varies, which means
there is a change in the number of electrons crossing the n–p
junction. Circuit 2 has a relatively large resistance and is under reverse bias. The key to operation of the transistor is that
current only ﬂows in circuit 2 when electrons crossing junction 1 also cross junction 2 and travel to the positive terminal. Since the current in circuit 1 determines the number of
electrons crossing junction 1, the number of electrons available to cross junction 2 is also directly proportional to the
current in circuit 1. The current in circuit 2 therefore varies
depending on the current in circuit 1.

T

V  IR
Since circuit 2 has a large resistance, a given current in circuit 2 produces a larger voltage than the same current in
circuit 1, which has a small resistance. Thus a signal or variable voltage in circuit 1, such as might be produced by a
human voice on a telephone, is reproduced in circuit 2, but
with much greater voltage changes. That is, the input signal
has been ampliﬁed by the junction transistor. This device,
which has replaced the large vacuum tube, is a tiny component of a printed circuit on a silicon chip.
Silicon chips are really “planar” transistors constructed
from thin layers of n-type and p-type regions connected by
conductors. A chip less than 1 cm wide can contain hundreds of printed circuits and be used in computers, radios,
and televisions.
A printed circuit has many n–p–n junction transistors.
Fig. 10.33 illustrates the formation of one transistor area.
The chip begins as a thin wafer of silicon that has been doped
with an n-type impurity. A protective layer of silicon dioxide
is then produced on the wafer by exposing it in a furnace
to an oxidizing atmosphere. The next step is to produce a
p-type semiconductor. To do this, the surface of the oxide
is covered by a polymeric photoresist, as shown in
Fig. 10.33(a). A template that only allows light to shine
through in selected areas is then placed on top [Fig.
10.33(b)], and light is shown on the chip. The photoresist

Transistor
Junction 1
Circuit 1

Variable
input
signal

Small
resistance

−

Junction 2

e–

e–

n

p

+
Forward bias

+

n

Circuit 2

Large
resistance

Amplified
output
signal

−
Reverse bias

FIGURE 10.32
A schematic of two circuits connected by a transistor. The signal in circuit 1 is ampliﬁed in
circuit 2.

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

10.5 Carbon and Silicon: Network Atomic Solids

that has been exposed to light undergoes a
chemical change that causes its solubility to be
different from the unexposed photoresist. The
exposed photoresist is dissolved using selective
solvents [Fig. 10.33(c)], and the exposed area
is treated with an etching solution to dissolve
the oxide coating [Fig. 10.33(d)]. When the
remaining photoresist is dissolved, the silicon
wafer has its oxide coating intact except at the
one spot (of diameter x), as shown in Fig.
10.33(d).
Exposing the wafer to a p-type impurity
such as boron at about 1000°C causes a p-type
semiconductor area to be formed in the exposed
spot as the boron atoms diffuse into the silicon
crystal [Fig. 10.33(e)]. Next, to form a small ntype area in the center of the p-type region, the
wafer is again placed in the oxidizing furnace
to be recoated over its entire surface with oxide. Then a new photoresist covering is applied,
which is illuminated through a template with a
transparent area indicated by y [Fig. 10.33(f)].
The photoresist and oxide are then removed
from the illuminated area, and the wafer is exposed to an n-type impurity to form a small
n-type region as shown in Fig. 10.33(g). Next,
conductors are layered onto the chip giving the
ﬁnished transistor [Fig. 10.33(h)], which has
two circuits connected through an n–p–n junction (see Fig. 10.32). This transistor then becomes a part of a large circuit layered onto the
chip and interconnected by conductors.
The method given here for producing a
printed circuit does not represent the latest technology in this ﬁeld. The manufacture of printed
circuits is a highly competitive business, and
changes in methodology occur almost daily.

Photoresist
Silicon dioxide
n
(a)

x

Template
(b)

(c)
x

(d)
B atoms
p
n
(e)

y

p
n

Template

(f)
n
p
n
(g)
Electrical
connections
n
p

FIGURE 10.33
The steps for forming a transistor in a crystal of
initially pure silicon.

Electrical
connection
(h)

y
x

453

454

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids
used bulky, unreliable vacuum tubes as rectiﬁers. The p–n junction has revolutionized electronics; modern solid-state components contain p–n junctions in printed
circuits.

10.6

A “steaming” piece of dry ice.

Molecular Solids

So far we have considered solids in which atoms occupy the lattice positions. In some of
these substances (network solids), the solid can be considered to be one giant molecule.
In addition, there are many types of solids that contain discrete molecular units at each
lattice position. A common example is ice, where the lattice positions are occupied by
water molecules [see Fig. 10.12(c)]. Other examples are dry ice (solid carbon dioxide),
some forms of sulfur that contain S8 molecules [Fig. 10.34(a)], and certain forms of phosphorus that contain P4 molecules [Fig. 10.34(b)]. These substances are characterized by
strong covalent bonding within the molecules but relatively weak forces between the molecules. For example, it takes only 6 kJ of energy to melt 1 mole of solid water (ice) because only intermolecular (H2OOH2O) interactions must be overcome. However, 470 kJ
of energy is required to break 1 mole of covalent OOH bonds. The differences between
the covalent bonds within the molecules and the forces between the molecules are apparent from the comparison of the interatomic and intermolecular distances in solids shown
in Table 10.6.
The forces that exist among the molecules in a molecular solid depend on the nature
of the molecules. Many molecules such as CO2, I2, P4, and S8 have no dipole moment,
and the intermolecular forces are London dispersion forces. Because these forces are often relatively small, we might expect all these substances to be gaseous at 25°C, as is the
case for carbon dioxide. However, as the size of the molecules increases, the London
forces become quite large, causing many of these substances to be solids at 25°C.
When molecules do have dipole moments, their intermolecular forces are signiﬁcantly greater, especially when hydrogen bonding is possible. Water molecules are particularly well suited to interact with each other because each molecule has two polar
OOH bonds and two lone pairs on the oxygen atom. This can lead to the association

Visualization: Molecular Solids

FIGURE 10.34
(a) Sulfur crystals (yellow) contain S8 molecules. (b) White phosphorus (containing P4
molecules) is so reactive with the oxygen in
air that it must be stored under water.

(a)

(b)

10.6 Molecular Solids

455

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Explosive Sniffer
hese days security is at the top of everyone’s list of
important concerns, especially for those people who are
responsible for the safety of our transportation systems. In
particular, airports need speedy and sensitive detectors for
explosives. Plastic explosives are especially tricky to detect
because they do not respond to metal detectors, and they can
be shaped into innocent-looking objects to avoid X-ray detection. However, a team of scientists at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory led by Thomas Thundat has just published a
description of an inexpensive device that is extremely
sensitive to two N-containing compounds found in plastic
explosives. The key part of this detection device is a tiny
(180-micrometer), V-shaped cantilever made of silicon. The
cantilever is shown in the accompanying photo next to a
human hair for size comparison.
The upper surface of the cantilever was ﬁrst coated with
a layer of gold and then a one-molecule-thick layer of an
acid that binds to each of the two N-containing molecules
to be detected: pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) and
hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine (RDX). When a stream of air containing tiny amounts of PETN or RDX passes over the cantilever, these molecules bind to the cantilever, causing it to
bend “like a diving board.” This bending is not due to the
added mass of the attached PETN and RDX. Rather, the deformation occurs because the area of the cantilever surface
where binding takes place stretches relative to the unbound
areas. A laser pointed at the cantilever detects the bending
motion when PETN or RDX (or both) is present. The
device’s sensitivity is quite remarkable: 14 parts per trillion
of PETN and 30 parts per trillion of RDX.

T

All in all, this device appears very promising for detecting plastic explosives in luggage. The cantilevers are inexpensive to construct (approximately $1), and the entire
device is about the size of a shoe box. Also, the Oak Ridge
team can fabricate thousands of cantilevers in one device.
By putting different coatings on the cantilever arms, it should
be possible to detect many other types of chemicals and
possible biological agents.
This detector looks like a very promising addition to
our arsenal of security devices.

When explosive compounds bind to these V-shaped cantilevers, the microscopic structures, which are about the width of a hair, bend and produce a signal.

TABLE 10.6 Comparison of Atomic Separations Within Molecules
(Covalent Bonds) and Between Molecules (Intermolecular
Interactions)
Solid
P4
S8
Cl2

Distance Between
Atoms in Molecule*

Closest Distance Between
Molecules in the Solid

220 pm
206 pm
199 pm

380 pm
370 pm
360 pm

*The shorter distances within the molecules indicate stronger bonding.

456

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids
of four hydrogen atoms with each oxygen: two by covalent bonds and two by dipole
forces:
H
O

n
n

H
H
H

n
n

O

H
O
H

Note the two relatively short covalent oxygen–hydrogen bonds and the two longer
oxygen–hydrogen dipole interactions that can be seen in the ice structure in Fig. 10.12(c).

10.7
Trigonal
hole
(a)

Tetrahedral
hole

Ionic Solids

Ionic solids are stable, high-melting substances held together by the strong electrostatic
forces that exist between oppositely charged ions. The principles governing the structures
of ionic solids were introduced in Section 8.5. In this section we will review and extend
these principles.
The structures of most binary ionic solids, such as sodium chloride, can be explained
by the closest packing of spheres. Typically, the larger ions, usually the anions, are packed
in one of the closest packing arrangements (hcp or ccp), and the smaller cations ﬁt into
holes among the closest packed anions. The packing is done in a way that maximizes the
electrostatic attractions among oppositely charged ions and minimizes the repulsions
among ions with like charges.
There are three types of holes in closest packed structures:
1. Trigonal holes are formed by three spheres in the same layer [Fig. 10.35(a)].

(b)

2. Tetrahedral holes are formed when a sphere sits in the dimple of three spheres in an
adjacent layer [Fig. 10.35(b)].
Octahedral
hole

3. Octahedral holes are formed between two sets of three spheres in adjoining layers of
the closest packed structures [Fig. 10.35(c)].
For spheres of a given diameter, the holes increase in size in the order

(c)

FIGURE 10.35
The holes that exist among closest packed
uniform spheres. (a) The trigonal hole
formed by three spheres in a given plane.
(b) The tetrahedral hole formed when a
sphere occupies a dimple formed by three
spheres in an adjacent layer. (c) The octahedral hole formed by six spheres in two adjacent layers.

trigonal  tetrahedral  octahedral
In fact, trigonal holes are so small that they are never occupied in binary ionic compounds.
Whether the tetrahedral or octahedral holes in a given binary ionic solid are occupied depends mainly on the relative sizes of the anion and cation. For example, in zinc sulﬁde
the S2 ions (ionic radius  180 pm) are arranged in a cubic closest packed structure with
the smaller Zn2 ions (ionic radius  70 pm) in the tetrahedral holes. The locations of the
tetrahedral holes in the face-centered cubic unit cell of the ccp structure are shown in
Fig. 10.36(a). Note from this ﬁgure that there are eight tetrahedral holes in the unit
cell. Also recall from the discussion in Section 10.4 that there are four net spheres in the

Closest packed structures contain twice
as many tetrahedral holes as packed
spheres. Closest packed structures contain the same number of octahedral holes
as packed spheres.

Sample Exercise 10.3

+

FIGURE 10.36
(a) The location (X) of a tetrahedral hole in
the face-centered cubic unit cell. (b) One of
the tetrahedral holes. (c) The unit cell for
ZnS where the S2 ions (yellow) are closest
packed with the Zn2 ions (red) in alternating tetrahedral holes.

457

+

10.7 Ionic Solids

(a)

(b)

(c)

ZnS

face-centered cubic unit cell. Thus there are twice as many tetrahedral holes as packed
anions in the closest packed structure. Zinc sulﬁde must have the same number of S2 ions
and Zn2 ions to achieve electrical neutrality. Thus in the zinc sulﬁde structure only half
the tetrahedral holes contain Zn2 ions, as shown in Fig. 10.36(c).
The structure of sodium chloride can be described in terms of a cubic closest packed
array of Cl ions with Na ions in all the octahedral holes. The locations of the octahedral holes in the face-centered cubic unit cell are shown in Fig. 10.37(a). The easiest
octahedral hole to ﬁnd in this structure is the one at the center of the cube. Note that this
hole is surrounded by six spheres, as is required to form an octahedron. The remaining
octahedral holes are shared with other unit cells and are more difﬁcult to visualize.
However, it can be shown that the number of octahedral holes in the ccp structure is
the same as the number of packed anions. Figure 10.37(b) shows the structure for
sodium chloride that results from Na ions ﬁlling all the octahedral holes in a ccp array
of Cl ions.
A great variety of ionic solids exists. Our purpose in this section is not to give an exhaustive treatment of ionic solids, but to emphasize the fundamental principles governing
their structures. As we have seen, the most useful model for explaining the structures of
these solids regards the ions as hard spheres that are packed to maximize attractions and
minimize repulsions.

Determining the Number of Ions in a Unit Cell
Determine the net number of Na and Cl ions in the sodium chloride unit cell.
Solution

Visualization: Structure of an
Ionic Solid (NaCl).

Note from Fig. 10.37(b) that the Cl ions are cubic closest packed and thus form a facecentered cubic unit cell. There is a Cl ion on each corner and one at the center of each
face of the cube. Thus the net number of Cl ions present in a unit cell is

+

+

+

+

+

+

+
+
+
+

+

FIGURE 10.37
(a) The locations (gray X) of the octahedral
holes in the face-centered cubic unit cell. (b)
Representation of the unit cell for solid NaCl.
The Cl ions (green spheres) have a ccp
arrangement with Na ions (gray spheres) in
all the octahedral holes. Note that this representation shows the idealized closest packed
structure of NaCl. In the actual structure, the
Cl ions do not quite touch.

+

+

81 18 2  61 12 2  4

(a)

(b)

458

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids
The Na ions occupy the octahedral holes located in the center of the cube and midway along each edge. The Na ion in the center of the cube is contained entirely in the
unit cell, whereas those on the edges are shared by four unit cells (four cubes share a
common edge). Since the number of edges in a cube is 12, the net number of Na ions
present is
1112  121 14 2  4
We have shown that the net number of ions in a unit cell is 4 Na ions and 4 Cl ions,
which agrees with the 1:1 stoichiometry of sodium chloride.

See Exercises 10.61 through 10.68.
In this chapter we have considered various types of solids. Table 10.7 summarizes
these types of solids and some of their properties.

TABLE 10.7

Types and Properties of Solids
Atomic

Molecular

Ionic

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Type of Solid:

Network

Metallic

Group 8A

Structural Unit:

Atom

Atom

Atom

Molecule

Ion

Type of Bonding:

Directional
covalent bonds

Nondirectional covalent
bonds involving
electrons that are
delocalized
throughout the
crystal

London
dispersion
forces

Polar molecules:
dipole–dipole
interactions
Nonpolar molecules:
London dispersion
forces

Ionic

Typical Properties:

Hard

Soft

Hard

High melting
point

Wide range of
hardness
Wide range of
melting points

Low melting point

High melting
point

Insulator

Conductor

Insulator

Insulator

Diamond

Silver
Iron
Brass

Ice (solid H2O)
Dry ice (solid CO2)

Sodium chloride
Calcium ﬂuoride

Examples:

Very low
melting
point
Argon(s)

10.8 Vapor Pressure and Changes of State

Sample Exercise 10.4

459

Types of Solids
Using Table 10.7, classify each of the following substances according to the type of solid
it forms.
a.
b.
c.
d.

Gold
Carbon dioxide
Lithium ﬂuoride
Krypton

Solution
a. Solid gold is an atomic solid with metallic properties.
b. Solid carbon dioxide contains nonpolar carbon dioxide molecules and is a molecular
solid.
c. Solid lithium ﬂuoride contains Li and F ions and is a binary ionic solid.
d. Solid krypton contains krypton atoms that can interact only through London dispersion forces. It is an atomic solid but has properties characteristic of a molecular solid
with nonpolar molecules.
See Exercises 10.71 and 10.72.

10.8

Vapor is the usual term for the gas phase
of a substance that exists as a solid or
liquid at 25C and 1 atm.
Hvap for water at 100C is 40.7 kJ/mol.

Vapor Pressure and Changes of State

Now that we have considered the general properties of the three states of matter, we can
explore the processes by which matter changes state. One very familiar example of a
change in state occurs when a liquid evaporates from an open container. This is clear evidence that the molecules of a liquid can escape the liquid’s surface and form a gas, a
process called vaporization, or evaporation. Vaporization is endothermic because energy
is required to overcome the relatively strong intermolecular forces in the liquid. The energy required to vaporize 1 mole of a liquid at a pressure of 1 atm is called the heat of
vaporization, or the enthalpy of vaporization, and is usually symbolized as Hvap.
The endothermic nature of vaporization has great practical signiﬁcance; in fact, one
of the most important roles that water plays in our world is to act as a coolant. Because
of the strong hydrogen bonding among its molecules in the liquid state, water has an unusually large heat of vaporization (40.7 kJ/mol). A signiﬁcant portion of the sun’s energy
that reaches earth is spent evaporating water from the oceans, lakes, and rivers rather than
warming the earth. The vaporization of water is also crucial to the body’s temperaturecontrol system through evaporation of perspiration.

Vapor Pressure
(a)

(b)

FIGURE 10.38
Behavior of a liquid in a closed container.
(a) Initially, net evaporation occurs as
molecules are transferred from the liquid
to the vapor phase, so the amount of liquid
decreases. (b) As the number of vapor
molecules increases, the rate of return to
the liquid (condensation) increases, until
ﬁnally the rate of condensation equals the
rate of evaporation. The system is at equilibrium, and no further changes occur in
the amounts of vapor or liquid.

When a liquid is placed in a closed container, the amount of liquid at ﬁrst decreases but
eventually becomes constant. The decrease occurs because there is an initial net transfer
of molecules from the liquid to the vapor phase (Fig. 10.38). This evaporation process occurs at a constant rate at a given temperature (see Fig. 10.39). However, the reverse process
is different. Initially, as the number of vapor molecules increases, so does the rate of return of these molecules to the liquid. The process by which vapor molecules re-form a
liquid is called condensation. Eventually, enough vapor molecules are present above the
liquid so that the rate of condensation equals the rate of evaporation (see Fig. 10.39). At
this point no further net change occurs in the amount of liquid or vapor because the two
opposite processes exactly balance each other; the system is at equilibrium. Note that
this system is highly dynamic on the molecular level—molecules are constantly escaping
from and entering the liquid at a high rate. However, there is no net change because the
two opposite processes just balance each other.

460

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

FIGURE 10.39
The rates of condensation and evaporation
over time for a liquid sealed in a closed
container. The rate of evaporation remains
constant and the rate of condensation increases as the number of molecules in the
vapor phase increases, until the two rates
become equal. At this point, the equilibrium vapor pressure is attained.

Rate

Rate of
evaporation

Rates are equal
beyond this time;
equilibrium vapor
pressure is attained.

Rate of
condensation

Time

The pressure of the vapor present at equilibrium is called the equilibrium vapor
pressure, or more commonly, the vapor pressure of the liquid. A simple barometer can
measure the vapor pressure of a liquid, as shown in Fig. 10.40(a). The liquid is injected
at the bottom of the tube of mercury and ﬂoats to the surface because the mercury is so
dense. A portion of the liquid evaporates at the top of the column, producing a vapor
whose pressure pushes some mercury out of the tube. When the system reaches equilibrium, the vapor pressure can be determined from the change in the height of the mercury
column since
A system at equilibrium is dynamic on
the molecular level but shows no macroscopic changes.

Patmosphere  Pvapor  PHg column
Thus

Pvapor  Patmosphere  PHg column

The vapor pressures of liquids vary widely [see Fig. 10.40(b)]. Liquids with high
vapor pressures are said to be volatile—they evaporate rapidly from an open dish. The
vapor pressure of a liquid is principally determined by the size of the intermolecular forces
in the liquid. Liquids in which the intermolecular forces are large have relatively low vapor

760 – 736 =
24 torr

Vapor
pressure
Vacuum

H2 O
vapor

760 – 695 =
65 torr
C2H5OH
vapor

760 – 215 =
545 torr
(C2H5)2O
vapor

Patm = 760 torr
736

FIGURE 10.40
(a) The vapor pressure of a liquid can be
measured easily using a simple barometer
of the type shown here. (b) The three liquids, water, ethanol (C2H5OH), and diethyl
ether [(C2H5)2O], have quite different vapor
pressures. Ether is by far the most volatile
of the three. Note that in each case a little
liquid remains (ﬂoating on the mercury).

695

215

(a)

(b)

TABLE 10.8 The Vapor Pressure
of Water as a Function of
Temperature
T (C)

P (torr)

0.0
10.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
40.0
60.0
70.0
90.0

4.579
9.209
17.535
23.756
31.824
55.324
149.4
233.7
525.8

T1

(a)

Energy needed
to overcome
intermolecular
forces in liquid

Kinetic energy

461

Energy needed
to overcome
intermolecular
forces in liquid

Number of molecules
with a given energy

FIGURE 10.41
The number of molecules in a liquid with a
given energy versus kinetic energy at two
temperatures. Part (a) shows a lower temperature than that in part (b). Note that the
proportion of molecules with enough energy to escape the liquid to the vapor phase
(indicated by shaded areas) increases dramatically with temperature. This causes
vapor pressure to increase markedly with
temperature.

Number of molecules
with a given energy

10.8 Vapor Pressure and Changes of State

T2

(b)

Kinetic energy

pressures because the molecules need high energies to escape to the vapor phase. For
example, although water has a much lower molar mass than diethyl ether, the strong
hydrogen-bonding forces that exist among water molecules in the liquid cause water’s
vapor pressure to be much lower than that of diethyl ether [see Fig. 10.40(b)]. In general,
substances with large molar masses have relatively low vapor pressures, mainly because
of the large dispersion forces. The more electrons a substance has, the more polarizable
it is, and the greater the dispersion forces are.
Measurements of the vapor pressure for a given liquid at several temperatures show
that vapor pressure increases signiﬁcantly with temperature. Figure 10.41 illustrates the
distribution of molecular kinetic energy present in a liquid at two different temperatures.
To overcome the intermolecular forces in a liquid, a molecule must have sufﬁcient kinetic
energy. As the temperature of the liquid is increased, the fraction of molecules having the
minimum energy needed to overcome these forces and escape to the vapor phase increases
markedly. Thus the vapor pressure of a liquid increases dramatically with temperature.
Values for water at several temperatures are given in Table 10.8.
The quantitative nature of the temperature dependence of vapor pressure can be represented graphically. Plots of vapor pressure versus temperature for water, ethanol, and
diethyl ether are shown in Fig. 10.42(a). Note the nonlinear increase in vapor pressure
for all the liquids as the temperature is increased. We ﬁnd that a straight line can be obtained by plotting ln(Pvap) versus 1T, where T is the Kelvin temperature, as shown in
Fig. 10.42(b). We can represent this behavior by the equation
ln1Pvap 2  

¢Hvap 1
a bC
R
T

(10.4)

where Hvap is the enthalpy of vaporization, R is the universal gas constant, and C is a
constant characteristic of a given liquid. The symbol ln means that the natural logarithm
of the vapor pressure is taken.
Equation (10.4) is the equation for a straight line of the form y  mx  b, where
y  ln1Pvap 2
1
x
T

Natural logarithms are reviewed in
Appendix 1.2.

Sample Exercise 10.5

m  slope  

¢Hvap

R
b  intercept  C

Determining Enthalpies of Vaporization
Using the plots in Fig. 10.42(b), determine whether water or diethyl ether has the larger
enthalpy of vaporization.

462

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

900
800

34.6°

760

78.4°

100.0°

700
600

400

ln (Pvap )

Pvap (torr)

Diethyl ether
500

Ethanol
300

Diethyl ether

Water

Water
200
Ethanol
100
0

0

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Temperature (°C)

(a)

1/T (K)
(b)

FIGURE 10.42
(a) The vapor pressure of water, ethanol, and diethyl ether as a function of temperature. (b) Plots of In(Pvap) versus
1T (Kelvin temperature) for water, ethanol, and diethyl ether.

Solution
When ln(Pvap) is plotted versus 1T, the slope of the resulting straight line is


¢Hvap
R

Note from Fig. 10.42(b) that the slopes of the lines for water and diethyl ether are both
negative, as expected, and that the line for ether has the smaller slope. Thus ether has the
smaller value of Hvap. This makes sense because the hydrogen bonding in water causes
it to have a relatively large enthalpy of vaporization.
See Exercise 10.79.
Equation (10.4) is important for several reasons. For example, we can determine the
heat of vaporization for a liquid by measuring Pvap at several temperatures and then
evaluating the slope of a plot of ln(Pvap) versus 1T. On the other hand, if we know the
values of Hvap and Pvap at one temperature, we can use Equation (10.4) to calculate Pvap
at another temperature. This can be done by recognizing that the constant C does not
depend on temperature. Thus at two temperatures T1 and T2 we can solve Equation (10.4)
for C and then write the equality
ln1Pvap,T1 2 

¢Hvap
RT1

 C  ln1Pvap,T2 2 

¢Hvap
RT2

10.8 Vapor Pressure and Changes of State

463

This can be rearranged to
ln1Pvap,T1 2  ln1Pvap,T2 2 
Equation (10.5) is called the
Clausius–Clapeyron equation.

Sample Exercise 10.6

or

lna

Pvap,T1
Pvap,T2

b

¢Hvap 1
1
a  b
R
T2
T1
¢Hvap 1
1
a  b
R
T2
T1

(10.5)

Calculating Vapor Pressure
The vapor pressure of water at 25°C is 23.8 torr, and the heat of vaporization of water at
25°C is 43.9 kJ/mol. Calculate the vapor pressure of water at 50.°C.
Solution
We will use Equation (10.5):

In solving this problem, we ignore the
fact that Hvap is slightly temperature
dependent.

ln a

Pvap,T1
Pvap,T2

b

¢Hvap 1
1
a  b
R
T2
T1

For water we have

Thus

Phase changes of carbon dioxide are
discussed in Section 10.9.

Pvap,T1  23.8 torr
T1  25  273  298 K
T2  50.  273  323 K
¢Hvap  43.9 KJ/mol  43,900 J/mol
R  8.3145 J/K mol
23.8 torr
43,900 J/mol
1
1
ln a
b
a

b
Pvap,T2 1torr2
8.3145 J/K mol 323 K
298 K
23.8
ln a
b  1.37
Pvap,T2

Taking the antilog (see Appendix 1.2) of both sides gives
23.8
 0.254
Pvap,T2
Pvap,T2  93.7 torr
See Exercises 10.81 through 10.84.

Sublimation: A process in which a substance goes directly from the solid to the
gaseous state.

Like liquids, solids have vapor pressures. Figure 10.43 shows iodine vapor in equilibrium with solid iodine in a closed ﬂask. Under normal conditions iodine sublimes; that
is, it goes directly from the solid to the gaseous state without passing through the liquid
state. Sublimation also occurs with dry ice (solid carbon dioxide).

Changes of State

Visualization: Changes of State

What happens when a solid is heated? Typically, it will melt to form a liquid. If the heating continues, the liquid will at some point boil and form the vapor phase. This process
can be represented by a heating curve: a plot of temperature versus time for a process
where energy is added at a constant rate.
The heating curve for water is given in Fig. 10.44. As energy ﬂows into the ice, the
random vibrations of the water molecules increase as the temperature rises. Eventually,
the molecules become so energetic that they break loose from their lattice positions,
and the change from solid to liquid occurs. This is indicated by a plateau at 0°C on the

464

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

140
Steam

Temperature (°C)

120

Water and steam

100
80

Water

60
40
20

Ice and
water

0
–20

Ice
Time

FIGURE 10.43
Iodine being heated, causing it to sublime,
forming crystals of I2(s) on the bottom of
an evaporating dish cooled by ice.

Ionic solids such as NaCl and NaF have
very high melting points and enthalpies
of fusion because of the strong ionic
forces in these solids. At the other extreme is O2(s), a molecular solid containing nonpolar molecules with weak
intermolecular forces. (See Table 10.9.)

The melting and boiling points will be deﬁned more precisely later in this section.

FIGURE 10.44
The heating curve (not drawn to scale) for a given quantity of water where energy is added at a constant rate. The plateau at the
boiling point is longer than the plateau at the melting point because it takes almost seven times more energy (and thus seven
times the heating time) to vaporize liquid water than to melt ice.
The slopes of the other lines are different because the different
states of water have different molar heat capacities (the energy required to raise the temperature of 1 mole of a substance by 1C).

heating curve. At this temperature, called the melting point, all the added energy is used
to disrupt the ice structure by breaking the hydrogen bonds, thus increasing the potential
energy of the water molecules. The enthalpy change that occurs at the melting point
when a solid melts is called the heat of fusion, or more accurately, the enthalpy of fusion,
Hfus. The melting points and enthalpies of fusion for several representative solids are
listed in Table 10.9.
The temperature remains constant until the solid has completely changed to liquid;
then it begins to increase again. At 100C the liquid water reaches its boiling point, and
the temperature then remains constant as the added energy is used to vaporize the liquid.
When the liquid is completely changed to vapor, the temperature again begins to rise. Note
that changes of state are physical changes; although intermolecular forces have been overcome, no chemical bonds have been broken. If the water vapor were heated to much higher
temperatures, the water molecules would break down into the individual atoms. This would

TABLE 10.9 Melting Points and Enthalpies of Fusion
for Several Representative Solids
Compound

Melting Point
(°C)

Enthalpy of
Fusion (kJ/mol)

O2
HCl
HI
CCl4
CHCl3
H2O
NaF
NaCl

218
114
51
23
64
0
992
801

0.45
1.99
2.87
2.51
9.20
6.02
29.3
30.2

10.8 Vapor Pressure and Changes of State

465

Pvap (torr)

10

5

Vapor
pressure
of liquid

Water vapor

Vapor pressure
of solid
0

–5

0
Temperature (°C)

+5

FIGURE 10.45
The vapor pressures of solid and liquid water as a function of temperature. The data
for liquid water below 0C are obtained
from supercooled water. The data for solid
water above 0C are estimated by extrapolation of vapor pressure from below 0C.

Solid
water

Liquid
water

FIGURE 10.46
An apparatus that allows solid and liquid water to
interact only through the vapor state.

be a chemical change, since covalent bonds are broken. We no longer have water after
this occurs.
The melting and boiling points for a substance are determined by the vapor pressures
of the solid and liquid states. Figure 10.45 shows the vapor pressures of solid and liquid
water as functions of temperature near 0C Note that below 0C the vapor pressure of ice
is less than the vapor pressure of liquid water. Also note that the vapor pressure of ice has
a larger temperature dependence than that of the liquid. That is, the vapor pressure of ice
increases more rapidly for a given rise in temperature than does the vapor pressure of water. Thus, as the temperature of the solid is increased, a point is eventually reached where
the liquid and solid have identical vapor pressures. This is the melting point.
These concepts can be demonstrated experimentally using the apparatus illustrated in
Fig. 10.46, where ice occupies one compartment and liquid water the other. Consider the
following cases.
Case 1
A temperature at which the vapor pressure of the solid is greater than that of the liquid.
At this temperature the solid requires a higher pressure than the liquid does to be in
equilibrium with the vapor. Thus, as vapor is released from the solid to try to achieve equilibrium, the liquid will absorb vapor in an attempt to reduce the vapor pressure to its
equilibrium value. The net effect is a conversion from solid to liquid through the vapor
phase. In fact, no solid can exist under these conditions. The amount of solid will steadily
decrease and the volume of liquid will increase. Finally, there will be only liquid in the
right compartment, which will come to equilibrium with the water vapor, and no further
changes will occur in the system. This temperature must be above the melting point of
ice, since only the liquid state can exist.
Case 2
A temperature at which the vapor pressure of the solid is less than that of the liquid. This
is the opposite of the situation in case 1. In this case, the liquid requires a higher pressure than the solid does to be in equilibrium with the vapor, so the liquid will gradually
disappear, and the amount of ice will increase. Finally, only the solid will remain, which
will achieve equilibrium with the vapor. This temperature must be below the melting point
of ice, since only the solid state can exist.

466

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

Constant pressure
of 1 atmosphere

Movable
piston
Liquid water

FIGURE 10.47
Water in a closed system with a pressure of
1 atm exerted on the piston. No bubbles
can form within the liquid as long as the
vapor pressure is less than 1 atm.

Case 3
A temperature at which the vapor pressures of the solid and liquid are identical. In this
case, the solid and liquid states have the same vapor pressure, so they can coexist in the
apparatus at equilibrium simultaneously with the vapor. This temperature represents the
freezing point where both the solid and liquid states can exist.
We can now describe the melting point of a substance more precisely. The normal
melting point is deﬁned as the temperature at which the solid and liquid states have the
same vapor pressure under conditions where the total pressure is 1 atmosphere.
Boiling occurs when the vapor pressure of a liquid becomes equal to the pressure of
its environment. The normal boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which the vapor pressure of the liquid is exactly 1 atmosphere. This concept is illustrated in Fig. 10.47.
At temperatures where the vapor pressure of the liquid is less than 1 atmosphere, no
bubbles of vapor can form because the pressure on the surface of the liquid is greater than
the pressure in any spaces in the liquid where the bubbles are trying to form. Only when
the liquid reaches a temperature at which the pressure of vapor in the spaces in the liquid
is 1 atmosphere can bubbles form and boiling occur.
However, changes of state do not always occur exactly at the boiling point or melting
point. For example, water can be readily supercooled; that is, it can be cooled below 0°C
at 1 atm pressure and remain in the liquid state. Supercooling occurs because, as it is cooled,
the water may not achieve the degree of organization necessary to form ice at 0°C, and
thus it continues to exist as the liquid. At some point the correct ordering occurs and ice
rapidly forms, releasing energy in the exothermic process and bringing the temperature
back up to the melting point, where the remainder of the water freezes (see Fig. 10.48).
A liquid also can be superheated, or raised to temperatures above its boiling point,
especially if it is heated rapidly. Superheating can occur because bubble formation in the
interior of the liquid requires that many high-energy molecules gather in the same vicinity, and this may not happen at the boiling point, especially if the liquid is heated rapidly.
If the liquid becomes superheated, the vapor pressure in the liquid is greater than the atmospheric pressure. Once a bubble does form, since its internal pressure is greater than
that of the atmosphere, it can burst before rising to the surface, blowing the surrounding
liquid out of the container. This is called bumping and has ruined many experiments. It
can be avoided by adding boiling chips to the ﬂask containing the liquid. Boiling chips
are bits of porous ceramic material containing trapped air that escapes on heating, forming tiny bubbles that act as “starters” for vapor bubble formation. This allows a smooth
onset of boiling as the boiling point is reached.

Temperature (°C)

Liquid

Boiling chip releasing air bubbles acts as a
nucleating agent for the bubbles that form
when water boils.

Expected
behavior
0°
S

Crystallization
begins

FIGURE 10.48
The supercooling of water. The extent of supercooling is given by S.

Liquid
and solid

Time

10.9 Phase Diagrams

10.9

467

Phase Diagrams

A phase diagram is a convenient way of representing the phases of a substance as a function of temperature and pressure. For example, the phase diagram for water (Fig. 10.49)
shows which state exists at a given temperature and pressure. It is important to recognize
that a phase diagram describes conditions and events in a closed system of the type represented in Fig. 10.47, where no material can escape into the surroundings and no air is
present. Notice that the diagram is not drawn to scale (neither axis is linear). This is done
to emphasize certain features of the diagram that will be discussed below.
To show how to interpret the phase diagram for water, we will consider heating experiments at several pressures, shown by the dashed lines in Fig. 10.50.
Experiment 1
Pressure is 1 atm. This experiment begins with the cylinder shown in Fig. 10.47 completely
ﬁlled with ice at a temperature of 20°C and the piston exerting a pressure of 1 atm directly on the ice (there is no air space). Since at temperatures below 0°C the vapor pressure
of ice is less than 1 atm—which is the constant external pressure on the piston—no vapor
is present in the cylinder. As the cylinder is heated, ice is the only component until the
temperature reaches 0°C, where the ice changes to liquid water as energy is added. This
is the normal melting point of water. Note that under these conditions no vapor exists in
the system. The vapor pressures of the solid and liquid are equal, but this vapor pressure is
less than 1 atm, so no water vapor can exist. This is true on the solid/liquid line everywhere
except at the triple point (see Experiment 3 below). When the solid has completely changed
to liquid, the temperature again rises. At this point, the cylinder contains only liquid water.
No vapor is present because the vapor pressure of liquid water under these conditions is
less than 1 atm, the constant external pressure on the piston. Heating continues until the
temperature of the liquid water reaches 100°C. At this point, the vapor pressure of liquid
water is 1 atm, and boiling occurs, with the liquid changing to vapor. This is the normal
boiling point of water. After the liquid has been completely converted to steam, the temperature again rises as the heating continues. The cylinder now contains only water vapor.
Experiment 2
Pressure is 2.0 torr. Again, we start with ice as the only component in the cylinder at
20°C. The pressure exerted by the piston in this case is only 2.0 torr. As heating proceeds, the temperature rises to 10°C, where the ice changes directly to vapor, a process
known as sublimation. Sublimation occurs when the vapor pressure of ice is equal to the

FIGURE 10.49
The phase diagram for water. Tm represents
the normal melting point; T3 and P3
denote the triple point; Tb represents the
normal boiling point; Tc represents the
critical temperature; Pc represents the critical pressure. The negative slope of the
solid/liquid line reﬂects the fact that the
density of ice is less than that of liquid
water. (Note that this line extends indeﬁnitely, as indicated by the arrow.)

Pressure (atm)

Critical
point
Pc = 218
Liquid
Solid
1.00
P3 = 0.0060

Gas
Triple
point

Tm
T3
0 0.0098

Tb
100

Temperature (°C )

Tc
374

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

Pressure (atm)

468

Expt 4
Solid

Liquid

Gas
Expt 1

1.0
Expt 3
Expt 2

FIGURE 10.50
Diagrams of various heating experiments
on samples of water in a closed system.

Temperature (K)

external pressure, which in this case is only 2.0 torr. No liquid water appears under these
conditions because the vapor pressure of liquid water is always greater than 2.0 torr, and
thus it cannot exist at this pressure. If liquid water were placed in a cylinder under such
a low pressure, it would vaporize immediately at temperatures above 10°C or freeze at
temperatures below 10°C.
Experiment 3
Pressure is 4.58 torr. Again, we start with ice as the only component in the cylinder at
20°C. In this case the pressure exerted on the ice by the piston is 4.58 torr. As the cylinder
is heated, no new phase appears until the temperature reaches 0.01°C (273.16 K). At this
point, called the triple point, solid and liquid water have identical vapor pressures of 4.58
torr. Thus at 0.01°C (273.16 K) and 4.58 torr all three states of water are present. In fact,
only under these conditions can all three states of water coexist in a closed system.
Experiment 4
Pressure is 225 atm. In this experiment we start with liquid water in the cylinder at 300°C;
the pressure exerted by the piston on the water is 225 atm. Liquid water can be present
at this temperature because of the high external pressure. As the temperature increases,
something happens that we did not see in the ﬁrst three experiments: The liquid gradually changes into a vapor but goes through an intermediate “ﬂuid” region, which is neither true liquid nor vapor. This is quite unlike the behavior at lower temperatures and
pressures, say at 100°C. and 1 atm, where the temperature remains constant while a definite phase change from liquid to vapor occurs. This unusual behavior occurs because the
conditions are beyond the critical point for water. The critical temperature can be deﬁned as the temperature above which the vapor cannot be liqueﬁed no matter what pressure
is applied. The critical pressure is the pressure required to produce liquefaction at the
critical temperature. Together, the critical temperature and the critical pressure deﬁne the
critical point. For water the critical point is 374°C and 218 atm. Note that the liquid/vapor
line on the phase diagram for water ends at the critical point. Beyond this point the transition from one state to another involves the intermediate “ﬂuid” region just described.

Applications of the Phase Diagram for Water
There are several additional interesting features of the phase diagram for water. Note that
the solid/liquid boundary line has a negative slope. This means that the melting point of
ice decreases as the external pressure increases. This behavior, which is opposite to that

10.9 Phase Diagrams

Pressure (atm)

Solid/liquid line
Pressure at which
ice changes to
water (at this
temperature)
Solid

Liquid

Gas

Temperature (K)

FIGURE 10.51
The phase diagram for water. At point X on
the phase diagram, water is a solid. However, as the external pressure is increased
while the temperature remains constant
(indicated by the vertical dotted line), the
solid/liquid line is crossed and the ice melts.

Visualization: Boiling Water
with Ice Water
Water boils at 89°C in Leadville,
Colorado.

The effect of pressure on ice allows this
skater to glide smoothly.

469

observed for most substances, occurs because the density of ice is less than that of liquid
water at the melting point. The maximum density of water occurs at 4°C; when liquid
water freezes, its volume increases.
We can account for the effect of pressure on the melting point of water using the following reasoning. At the melting point, liquid and solid water coexist—they are in dynamic equilibrium, since the rate at which ice is melting is just balanced by the rate at
which the water is freezing. What happens if we apply pressure to this system? When subjected to increased pressure, matter reduces its volume. This behavior is most dramatic
for gases but also occurs for condensed states. Since a given mass of ice at 0°C has a
larger volume than the same mass of liquid water, the system can reduce its volume in
response to the increased pressure by changing to liquid. Thus at 0°C and an external pressure greater than 1 atm, water is liquid. In other words, the freezing point of water is less
than 0°C when the pressure is greater than 1 atm.
Figure 10.51 illustrates the effect of pressure on ice. At the point X on the phase
diagram, ice is subjected to increased pressure at constant temperature. Note that as the
pressure is increased, the solid/liquid line is crossed, indicating that the ice melts. This
phenomenon may be important in ice skating. The narrow blade of the skate exerts a large
pressure, since the skater’s weight is supported by the small area of the blade. Also, the
frictional heating due to the moving skate contributes to the melting of the ice.* After
the blade passes, the liquid refreezes as normal pressure and temperature return. Without
this lubrication effect due to the thawing ice, ice skating would not be the smooth, graceful
activity that many people enjoy.
Ice’s lower density has other implications. When water freezes in a pipe or an engine
block, it will expand and break the container. This is why water pipes are insulated in
cold climates and antifreeze is used in water-cooled engines. The lower density of ice also
means that ice formed on rivers and lakes will ﬂoat, providing a layer of insulation that
helps prevent bodies of water from freezing solid in the winter. Aquatic life can therefore
continue to live through periods of freezing temperatures.
A liquid boils at the temperature where the vapor pressure of the liquid equals the
external pressure. Thus the boiling point of a substance, like the melting point, depends
on the external pressure. This is why water boils at different temperatures at different elevations (see Table 10.10), and any cooking carried out in boiling water will be affected
by this variation. For example, it takes longer to hard-boil an egg in Leadville, Colorado
(elevation: 10,150 ft), than in San Diego, California (sea level), since water boils at a lower
temperature in Leadville.
As we mentioned earlier, the phase diagram for water describes a closed system.
Therefore, we must be very cautious in using the phase diagram to explain the behavior
of water in a natural setting, such as on the earth’s surface. For example, in dry climates
(low humidity), snow and ice seem to sublime—a minimum amount of slush is produced.
Wet clothes put on an outside line at temperatures below 0°C freeze and then dry
while frozen. However, the phase diagram (Fig. 10.47) shows that ice should not be able
to sublime at normal atmospheric pressures. What is happening in these cases? Ice in
the natural environment is not in a closed system. The pressure is provided by the
atmosphere rather than by a solid piston. This means that the vapor produced over the
ice can escape from the immediate region as soon as it is formed. The vapor does
not come to equilibrium with the solid, and the ice slowly disappears. Sublimation,
which seems forbidden by the phase diagram, does in fact occur under these conditions,
although it is not the sublimation under equilibrium conditions described by the phase
diagram.

*The physics of ice skating is quite complex, and there is disagreement about whether the pressure or the
frictional heating of the ice skate is most important. See “Letter to the Editor,” by R. Silberman, J. Chem.
Ed. 65 (1988): 186.

470

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Making Diamonds at Low Pressures: Fooling
Mother Nature
n 1955 Robert H. Wentorf, Jr., accomplished something
that borders on alchemy—he turned peanut butter into
diamonds. He and his coworkers at the General Electric
Research and Development Center also changed rooﬁng
pitch, wood, coal, and many other carbon-containing materials into diamonds, using a process involving temperatures
of 2000°C and pressures of 105 atm. Although the ﬁrst
diamonds made by this process looked like black sand because of the impurities present, the process has now been
developed to a point such that beautiful, clear, gem-quality
diamonds can be produced. General Electric now has the capacity to produce 150 million carats (30,000 kg) of diamonds
annually (virtually all of which is “diamond grit” used for
industrial purposes such as abrasive coatings on cutting
tools). The production of large, gem-quality diamonds by
this process is still too expensive to compete with the natural
sources of these stones. However, this may change as methods are developed for making diamonds at low pressures.
The high temperatures and pressures used in the GE
process for making diamonds make sense if one looks at
the accompanying phase diagram for carbon. Note that
graphite—not diamond—is the most stable form of carbon

I

TABLE 10.10

10 11
Diamond

Liquid
Pressure (Pa)

10 9

Graphite
10 7
Vapor

0

2000
4000
Temperature (K)

6000

The phase diagram for carbon.

under ordinary conditions of temperature and pressure.
However, diamond becomes more stable than graphite at
very high pressures (as one would expect from the greater

Boiling Point of Water at Various Locations

Location
Top of Mt. Everest, Tibet
Top of Mt. McKinley, Alaska
Top of Mt. Whitney, Calif.
Leadville, Colo.
Top of Mt. Washington, N.H.
Boulder, Colo.
Madison, Wis.
New York City, N.Y.
Death Valley, Calif.

Feet Above
Sea Level

Patm
(torr)

Boiling Point
(°C)

29,028
20,320
14,494
10,150
6,293
5,430
900
10
282

240
340
430
510
590
610
730
760
770

70
79
85
89
93
94
99
100
100.3

The Phase Diagram for Carbon Dioxide

A carbon dioxide ﬁre extinguisher.

The phase diagram for carbon dioxide (Fig. 10.52) differs from that for water. The solid/
liquid line has a positive slope, since solid carbon dioxide is more dense than liquid carbon
dioxide. The triple point for carbon dioxide occurs at 5.1 atm and 56.6°C, and the critical
point occurs at 72.8 atm and 31°C. At a pressure of 1 atm, solid carbon dioxide sublimes

10.9 Phase Diagrams

density of diamond). The high temperature used in the GE
process is necessary to disrupt the bonds in graphite so that
diamond (the most stable form of carbon at the high pressures used in the process) can form. Once the diamond is
produced, the elemental carbon is “trapped” in this form at
normal conditions (25°C, 1 atm) because the reaction back
to the graphite form is so slow. That is, even though graphite
is more stable than diamond at 25°C and 1 atm, diamond
can exist almost indeﬁnitely because the conversion to
graphite is a very slow reaction. As a result, diamonds
formed at the high pressures found deep in the earth’s crust
can be brought to the earth’s surface by natural geologic
processes and continue to exist for millions of years.*
We have seen that diamond formed in the laboratory at
high pressures is “trapped” in this form, but this process is
very expensive. Can diamond be formed at low pressures?
The phase diagram for carbon says no. However, researchers
have found that under the right conditions diamonds can be

471

“grown” at low pressures. The process used is called chemical
vapor deposition (CVD). CVD uses an energy source to release carbon atoms from a compound such as methane into
a steady ﬂow of hydrogen gas (some of which is dissociated
to produce hydrogen atoms). The carbon atoms then deposit
as a diamond ﬁlm on a surface maintained at a temperature
between 600 and 900°C. Why does diamond form on this
surface rather than the favored graphite? Nobody is sure, but
it has been suggested that at these relatively high temperatures the diamond structure grows faster than the graphite
structure and so diamond is favored under these conditions.
It also has been suggested that the hydrogen atoms present
react much faster with graphite fragments than with diamond
fragments, effectively removing any graphite from the growing ﬁlm. Once it forms, of course, diamond is trapped. The
major advantage of CVD is that there is no need for the extraordinarily high pressures used in the traditional process
for synthesizing diamonds.
The ﬁrst products with diamond ﬁlms are already on the
market. Audiophiles can buy tweeters that have diaphragms
coated with a thin diamond ﬁlm that limits sound distortion.
Watches with diamond-coated crystals are planned, as are
diamond-coated windows in infrared scanning devices used
in analytical instruments and missile guidance systems.
These applications represent only the beginning for diamondcoated products.

*In Morocco, a 50-km-long slab called Beni Bousera contains chunks
of graphite that were probably once diamonds formed in the deposit
when it was buried 150 km underground. As this slab slowly rose to
the surface over millions of years, the very slow reaction changing
diamond to graphite had time to occur. On the other hand, in the
diamond-rich kimberlite deposits in South Africa, which rise to the surface much faster, the diamonds have not had sufﬁcient time to revert
to graphite.

at 78°C, a property that leads to its common name, dry ice. No liquid phase occurs under normal atmospheric conditions, making dry ice a convenient refrigerant.
Carbon dioxide is often used in ﬁre extinguishers, where it exists as a liquid at 25°C
under high pressures. Liquid carbon dioxide released from the extinguisher into the environment at 1 atm immediately changes to a vapor. Being heavier than air, this vapor smothers the ﬁre by keeping oxygen away from the ﬂame. The liquid/vapor transition is highly
endothermic, so cooling also results, which helps to put out the ﬁre.

Pressure (atm)

Critical
point
Pc =
72.8

Liquid
Solid

P3 =
5.1

Triple
point

Gas

1.00
Tm
–78

T3
–56.6

Temperature (°C)

Tc
31

FIGURE 10.52
The phase diagram for carbon dioxide. The liquid state
does not exist at a pressure of 1 atm. The solid/liquid line
has a positive slope, since the density of solid carbon
dioxide is greater than that of liquid carbon dioxide.

472

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

Key Terms
Section 10.1
condensed states
intermolecular forces
dipole–dipole attraction
hydrogen bonding
London dispersion forces

Section 10.2
surface tension
capillary action
viscosity

Section 10.3
crystalline solid
amorphous solid
lattice
unit cell
X-ray diffraction
ionic solid
molecular solid
atomic solid

Section 10.4
closest packing
hexagonal closest packed (hcp) structure
cubic closest packed (ccp) structure
band model
molecular orbital (MO) model
alloy
substitutional alloy
interstitial alloy

Section 10.5
network solid
silica
silicate
glass
ceramic
semiconductor
n-type semiconductor
p-type semiconductor
p–n junction

Section 10.8
vaporization (evaporation)
heat of vaporization
enthalpy of vaporization ( ¢Hvap)
condensation
equilibrium
equilibrium vapor pressure
sublimation
heating curve
enthalpy (heat) of fusion ( ¢Hfus)
normal melting point
normal boiling point
supercooled
superheated

For Review
Condensed states of matter: liquids and solids
䊉 Held together by forces among the component molecules, atoms, or ions
䊉 Liquids exhibit properties such as surface tension, capillary action, and viscosity
that depend on the forces among the components
Dipole–dipole forces
䊉 Attractions among molecules with dipole moments
䊉 Hydrogen bonding is a particularly strong form of dipole–dipole attraction
• Occurs in molecules containing hydrogen bonded to a highly electronegative element such as nitrogen, oxygen, or ﬂuorine
• Produces unusually high boiling points
London dispersion forces
䊉 Caused by instantaneous dipoles that form in atoms or nonpolar molecules
Crystalline solids
䊉 Have a regular arrangement of components often represented as a lattice; the
smallest repeating unit of the lattice is called the unit cell
䊉 Classiﬁed by the types of components:
• Atomic solids (atoms)
• Ionic solids (ions)
• Molecular solids (molecules)
䊉 Arrangement of the components can be determined by X-ray analysis
Metals
䊉 Structure is modeled by assuming atoms to be uniform spheres
• Closest packing
• Hexagonal
• Cubic
䊉 Metallic bonding can be described in terms of two models
• Electron sea model: valence electrons circulate freely among the metal cations
• Band model: electrons are assumed to occupy molecular orbitals
• Conduction bands: closely spaced molecular orbitals with empty electron spaces
䊉 Alloys: mixtures with metallic properties
• Substitutional
• Interstitial
Network solids
䊉 Contain giant networks of atoms covalently bound together
䊉 Examples are diamond and graphite
䊉 Silicates are network solids containing Si¬O¬Si bridges that form the basis for
many rocks, clays, and ceramics
Semiconductors
䊉 Very pure silicon is “doped” with other elements
• n-type: doping atoms typically contain ﬁve valence electrons (one more than silicon)
• p-type: doping elements typically contain three valence electrons
䊉 Modern electronics are based on devices with p–n junctions
Molecular solids
䊉 Components are discrete molecules
䊉 Intermolecular forces are typically weak, leading to relatively low boiling and
melting points

For Review
Section 10.9
phase diagram
triple point
critical temperature
critical pressure
critical point

473

Ionic solids
䊉 Components are ions
䊉 Interionic forces are relatively strong, leading to solids with high melting and
boiling points
䊉 Many structures consist of closest packing of the larger ions with the smaller ions
in tetrahedral or octahedral holes
Phase changes
䊉 The change from liquid to gas (vapor) is called vaporization or evaporation
䊉 Condensation is the reverse of vaporization
䊉 Equilibrium vapor pressure: the pressure that occurs over a liquid or solid in a
closed system when the rate of evaporation equals the rate of condensation
• Liquids whose components have high intermolecular forces have relatively low
vapor pressures
• Normal boiling point: the temperature at which the vapor pressure of a liquid
equals one atmosphere
• Normal melting point: the temperature at which a solid and its liquid have the
same vapor pressure (at 1 atm external pressure)
䊉 Phase diagram
• Shows what state exists at a given temperature and pressure in a closed system
• Triple point: temperature at which all three phases exist simultaneously
• Critical point: deﬁned by the critical temperature and pressure
• Critical temperature: the temperature above which the vapor cannot be liqueﬁed no matter the applied pressure
• Critical pressure: the pressure required to produce liquefaction at the critical
temperature

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are intermolecular forces? How do they differ from intramolecular forces?
What are dipole–dipole forces? How do typical dipole–dipole forces differ from
hydrogen-bonding interactions? In what ways are they similar? What are London
dispersion forces? How do typical London dispersion forces differ from dipole–
dipole forces? In what ways are they similar? Describe the relationship between
molecular size and strength of London dispersion forces. Place the major types
of intermolecular forces in order of increasing strength. Is there some overlap?
That is, can the strongest London dispersion forces be greater than some
dipole–dipole forces? Give an example of such an instance.
2. Deﬁne the following terms and describe how each depends on the strength of
the intermolecular forces.
a. surface tension
b. viscosity
c. melting point
d. boiling point
e. vapor pressure
3. Compare and contrast solids versus liquids versus gases.
4. Distinguish between the items in the following pairs.
a. crystalline solid; amorphous solid
b. ionic solid; molecular solid
c. molecular solid; network solid
d. metallic solid; network solid
5. What is a lattice? What is a unit cell? Describe a simple cubic unit cell. How many
net atoms are contained in a simple cubic unit cell? How is the radius of the atom

474

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

related to the cube edge length for a simple cubic unit cell? Answer the same questions for the body-centered cubic unit cell and for the face-centered unit cell.
What is closest packing? What is the difference between hexagonal closest packing and cubic closest packing? What is the unit cell for each closest packing?
Use the band model to describe differences among insulators, conductors, and
semiconductors. Also use the band model to explain why each of the following
increases the conductivity of a semiconductor.
a. increasing the temperature
b. irradiating with light
c. adding an impurity
How do conductors and semiconductors differ as to the effect of temperature on
electrical conductivity? How can an n-type semiconductor be produced from pure
germanium? How can a p-type semiconductor be produced from pure germanium?
Describe, in general, the structures of ionic solids. Compare and contrast the
structure of sodium chloride and zinc sulﬁde. How many tetrahedral holes and
octahedral holes are there per closest packed anion? In zinc sulﬁde, why are
only one-half of the tetrahedral holes ﬁlled with cations?
Deﬁne each of the following.
a. evaporation
b. condensation
c. sublimation
d. boiling
e. melting
f. enthalpy of vaporization
g. enthalpy of fusion
h. heating curve
Why is the enthalpy of vaporization for water much greater than its enthalpy of
fusion? What does this say about the changes in intermolecular forces in going
from solid to liquid to vapor? What do we mean when we say that a liquid is
volatile? Do volatile liquids have large or small vapor pressures at room temperature? What strengths of intermolecular forces occur in highly volatile liquids?
Compare and contrast the phase diagrams of water versus carbon dioxide. Why
doesn’t CO2 have a normal melting point and a normal boiling point, whereas
water does? The slopes of the solid–liquid lines in the phase diagrams of H2O
and CO2 are different. What do the slopes of the solid–liquid lines indicate in
terms of the relative densities of the solid and liquid states for each substance?
How do the melting points of H2O and CO2 depend on pressure? How do the
boiling points of H2O and CO2 depend on pressure? Rationalize why the critical
temperature for H2O is greater than that for CO2.

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. It is possible to balance a paper clip on the surface of water in
a beaker. If you add a bit of soap to the water, however, the paper clip sinks. Explain how the paper clip can ﬂoat and why it
sinks when soap is added.

2. Consider a sealed container half-ﬁlled with water. Which statement best describes what occurs in the container?
a. Water evaporates until the air is saturated with water vapor;
at this point, no more water evaporates.
b. Water evaporates until the air is overly saturated (supersaturated) with water, and most of this water recondenses; this
cycle continues until a certain amount of water vapor is present, and then the cycle ceases.
c. Water does not evaporate because the container is sealed.
d. Water evaporates, and then water evaporates and recondenses
simultaneously and continuously.

Exercises
e. Water evaporates until it is eventually all in vapor form.
Explain each choice. Justify your choice, and for choices you
did not pick, explain what is wrong with them.
3. Explain the following: You add 100 mL of water to a 500-mL
round-bottom ﬂask and heat the water until it is boiling. You
remove the heat and stopper the ﬂask, and the boiling stops.
You then run cool water over the neck of the ﬂask, and the
boiling begins again. It seems as though you are boiling water
by cooling it.
4. Is it possible for the dispersion forces in a particular substance
to be stronger than the hydrogen bonding forces in another substance? Explain your answer.
5. Does the nature of intermolecular forces change when a substance goes from a solid to a liquid, or from a liquid to a gas?
What causes a substance to undergo a phase change?
6. Why do liquids have a vapor pressure? Do all liquids have vapor
pressures? Explain. Do solids exhibit vapor pressure? Explain.
How does vapor pressure change with changing temperature?
Explain.
7. Water in an open beaker evaporates over time. As the water is
evaporating, is the vapor pressure increasing, decreasing, or staying the same? Why?
8. What is the vapor pressure of water at 100°C? How do you know?
9. Refer to Fig. 10.44. Why doesn’t temperature increase continuously over time? That is, why does the temperature stay constant
for periods of time?
10. Which are stronger, intermolecular or intramolecular forces for
a given molecule? What observation(s) have you made that support this? Explain.
11. Why does water evaporate?
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
12. The nonpolar hydrocarbon C25H52 is a solid at room
temperature. Its boiling point is greater than 400°C. Which has
the stronger intermolecular forces, C25H52 or H2O? Explain
your answer.
13. Atoms are assumed to touch in closest packed structures, yet
every closest packed unit cell contains a signiﬁcant amount of
empty space. Why?
14. Deﬁne critical temperature and critical pressure. In terms of the
kinetic molecular theory, why is it impossible for a substance to
exist as a liquid above its critical temperature?
15. Use the kinetic molecular theory to explain why a liquid gets
cooler as it evaporates from an insulated container.
16. Will a crystalline solid or an amorphous solid give a simpler
X-ray diffraction pattern? Why?
17. What is an alloy? Explain the differences in structure between
substitutional and interstitial alloys. Give an example of each
type.
18. Describe what is meant by a dynamic equilibrium in terms of
the vapor pressure of a liquid.

475

19. How does each of the following affect the rate of evaporation
of a liquid in an open dish?
a. intermolecular forces
b. temperature
c. surface area
20. When a person has a severe fever, one therapy used to reduce
the fever is an “alcohol rub.” Explain how the evaporation of alcohol from a person’s skin removes heat energy from the body.
21. When wet laundry is hung on a clothesline on a cold winter day,
it will freeze but eventually dry. Explain.
22. Why is a burn from steam typically much more severe than a
burn from boiling water?
23. You have three covalent compounds with three very different
boiling points. All of the compounds have similar molar mass
and relative shape. Explain how these three compounds could
have very different boiling points.
24. Compare and contrast the structures of the following solids.
a. diamond versus graphite
b. silica versus silicates versus glass
25. Compare and contrast the structures of the following solids.
a. CO2(s) versus H2O(s)
b. NaCl(s) versus CsCl(s); See Exercise 61 for the structures.
26. Silicon carbide (SiC) is an extremely hard substance that acts as
an electrical insulator. Propose a structure for SiC.
27. A plot of ln Pvap versus 1 T (K) is linear with a negative slope.
Why is this the case?
28. Iodine, like most substances, exhibits only three phases; solid,
liquid, and vapor. The triple point of iodine is at 90 torr and
115°C. Which of the following statements concerning liquid I2
must be true? Explain your answer.
a. I2(l) is more dense than I2(g).
b. I2(l) cannot exist above 115°C.
c. I2(l) cannot exist at 1 atmosphere pressure.
d. I2(l) cannot have a vapor pressure greater than 90 torr.
e. I2(l) cannot exist at a pressure of 10 torr.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Intermolecular Forces and Physical Properties
29. Identify the most important types of interparticle forces present
in the solids of each of the following substances.
a. Ar
e. CH4
b. HCl
f. CO
c. HF
g. NaNO3
d. CaCl2
30. Identify the most important types of interparticle forces present
in the solids of each of the following substances.
a. NH4Cl
b. Teﬂon, CF3(CF2CF2)nCF3
c. Polyethylene, CH3(CH2CH2)nCH3
d. CHCl3
e. NH3
f. NO
g. BF3

476

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

31. Predict which substance in each of the following pairs would
have the greater intermolecular forces.
a. CO2 or OCS
b. SeO2 or SO2
c. CH3CH2CH2NH2 or H2NCH2CH2NH2
d. CH3CH3 or H2CO
e. CH3OH or H2CO

e. greatest heat of vaporization: H2CO, CH3CH3, CH4
f. smallest enthalpy of fusion: I2, CsBr, CaO

Properties of Liquids
37. The shape of the meniscus of water in a glass tube is different
from that of mercury in a glass tube. Why?

32. Consider the compounds Cl2, HCl, F2, NaF, and HF. Which compound has a boiling point closest to that of argon? Explain.
33. Rationalize the difference in boiling points for each of the following pairs of substances:
a. n-pentane
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3
36.2°C
CH3
neopentane

H3C

C

CH3

9.5°C

H2O in glass

Hg in glass

CH3
38. Explain why water forms into beads on a waxed car ﬁnish.
b. HF
20°C
HCl
85°C
c. HCl
85°C
LiCl
1360°C
d. n-pentane
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3
n-hexane
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3

36.2°C
69°C

34. Consider the following compounds and formulas. (Note: The formulas are written in such a way as to give you an idea of the
structure.)
ethanol:
dimethyl ether:
propane:

CH3CH2OH
CH3OCH3
CH3CH2CH3

The boiling points of these compounds are (in no particular
order) 42.1°C, 23°C, and 78.5°C. Match the boiling points
to the correct compounds.
35. In each of the following groups of substances, pick the one that
has the given property. Justify your answer.
a. highest boiling point: HBr, Kr, or Cl2
b. highest freezing point: H2O, NaCl, or HF
c. lowest vapor pressure at 25°C: Cl2, Br2, or I2
d. lowest freezing point: N2, CO, or CO2
e. lowest boiling point: CH4, CH3CH3, or CH3CH2CH3
f. highest boiling point: HF, HCl, or HBr

39. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is a syrupy liquid with a relatively
low vapor pressure and a normal boiling point of 152.2°C.
Rationalize the differences of these physical properties from
those of water.
40. Carbon diselenide (CSe2) is a liquid at room temperature. The
normal boiling point is 125°C, and the melting point is 45.5°C.
Carbon disulﬁde (CS2) is also a liquid at room temperature with
normal boiling and melting points of 46.5°C and 111.6°C, respectively. How do the strengths of the intermolecular forces vary
from CO2 to CS2 to CSe2? Explain.

Structures and Properties of Solids
41. X rays from a copper X-ray tube (l  154 pm) were diffracted
at an angle of 14.22 degrees by a crystal of silicon. Assuming
ﬁrst-order diffraction (n  1 in the Bragg equation), what is the
interplanar spacing in silicon?
42. The second-order diffraction (n  2) for a gold crystal is at an
angle of 22.20° for X rays of 154 pm. What is the spacing
between these crystal planes?

O
B
g. lowest vapor pressure at 25ºC: CH3CH2CH3, CH3CCH3, or
CH3CH2CH2OH

43. A topaz crystal has an interplanar spacing (d) of 1.36 Å (1 Å 
1  1010 m). Calculate the wavelength of the X ray that should
be used if u  15.0° (assume n  1).
44. X rays of wavelength 2.63 Å were used to analyze a crystal.
The angle of ﬁrst-order diffraction (n  1 in the Bragg equation) was 15.55 degrees. What is the spacing between crystal
planes, and what would be the angle for second-order diffraction (n  2)?

36. In each of the following groups of substances, pick the one that
has the given property. Justify each answer.
a. highest boiling point: CCl4, CF4, CBr4
b. lowest freezing point: LiF, F2, HCl
c. smallest vapor pressure at 25°C: CH3OCH3, CH3CH2OH,
CH3CH2CH3
d. greatest viscosity: H2S, HF, H2O2

45. Calcium has a cubic closest packed structure as a solid. Assuming that calcium has an atomic radius of 197 pm, calculate the
density of solid calcium.
46. Nickel has a face-centered cubic unit cell. The density of
nickel is 6.84 g/cm3. Calculate a value for the atomic radius
of nickel.

Exercises

477

47. A certain form of lead has a cubic closest packed structure with
an edge length of 492 pm. Calculate the value of the atomic
radius and the density of lead.
48. You are given a small bar of an unknown metal X. You ﬁnd the
density of the metal to be 10.5 g/cm3. An X-ray diffraction experiment measures the edge of the face-centered cubic unit cell
as 4.09 Å (1 Å  1010 m). Identify X.
49. Titanium metal has a body-centered cubic unit cell. The density
of titanium is 4.50 g/cm3. Calculate the edge length of the unit
cell and a value for the atomic radius of titanium. (Hint: In a
body-centered arrangement of spheres, the spheres touch across
the body diagonal.)
50. Barium has a body-centered cubic structure. If the atomic
radius of barium is 222 pm, calculate the density of solid
barium.
51. The radius of gold is 144 pm, and the density is 19.32 g/cm3.
Does elemental gold have a face-centered cubic structure or a
body-centered cubic structure?
52. The radius of tungsten is 137 pm and the density is 19.3 g/cm3.
Does elemental tungsten have a face-centered cubic structure or
a body-centered cubic structure?
53. What fraction of the total volume of a cubic closest packed structure is occupied by atoms? (Hint: Vsphere  43 pr 3.) What fraction
of the total volume of a simple cubic structure is occupied by
atoms? Compare the answers.
54. Iron has a density of 7.86 g/cm3 and crystallizes in a bodycentered cubic lattice. Show that only 68% of a body-centered
lattice is actually occupied by atoms, and determine the atomic
radius of iron.
55. Explain how doping silicon with either phosphorus or gallium increases the electrical conductivity over that of pure
silicon.
56. Explain how a p–n junction makes an excellent rectiﬁer.
57. Selenium is a semiconductor used in photocopying machines.
What type of semiconductor would be formed if a small amount
of indium impurity is added to pure selenium?
58. The Group 3A/Group 5A semiconductors are composed of
equal amounts of atoms from Group 3A and Group 5A—for
example, InP and GaAs. These types of semiconductors are
used in light-emitting diodes and solid-state lasers. What
would you add to make a p-type semiconductor from pure
GaAs? How would you dope pure GaAs to make an n-type
semiconductor?

Cl

Na

Cl

Cs

S

Zn

O

Ti

62. The unit cell for nickel arsenide is shown below. What is the formula of this compound?

Ni
As

63. Cobalt ﬂuoride crystallizes in a closest packed array of ﬂuoride
ions with the cobalt ions ﬁlling one-half of the octahedral holes.
What is the formula of this compound?
64. The compounds Na2O, CdS, and ZrI4 all can be described as cubic closest packed anions with the cations in tetrahedral holes.
What fraction of the tetrahedral holes is occupied for each case?
65. What is the formula for the compound that crystallizes with a
cubic closest packed array of sulfur ions, and that contains zinc
ions in 18 of the tetrahedral holes and aluminum ions in 12 of the
octahedral holes?
66. Assume the two-dimensional structure of an ionic compound,
MxAy, is

59. The band gap in aluminum phosphide (AlP) is 2.5 electron-volts
(1eV  1.6  1019 J). What wavelength of light is emitted by
an AlP diode?
60. An aluminum antimonide solid-state laser emits light with a
wavelength of 730. nm. Calculate the band gap in joules.
61. The structures of some common crystalline substances are shown
below. Show that the net composition of each unit cell corresponds to the correct formula of each substance.

What is the empirical formula of this ionic compound?

478

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

67. A certain metal ﬂuoride crystallizes in such a way that the ﬂuoride ions occupy simple cubic lattice sites, while the metal ions
occupy the body centers of half the cubes. What is the formula
of the metal ﬂuoride?
68. The structure of manganese ﬂuoride can be described as a simple cubic array of manganese ions with ﬂuoride ions at the center of each edge of the cubic unit cell. What is the charge of the
manganese ions in this compound?

74. The unit cell for a pure xenon ﬂuoride compound is shown below.
What is the formula of the compound?
Xenon
Fluorine

69. The unit cell of MgO is shown below.
75. Perovskite is a mineral containing calcium, titanium, and oxygen.
Two different representations of the unit cell are shown below.
Show that both these representations give the same formula and
the same number of oxygen atoms around each titanium atom.

Titanium
Calcium
Oxygen

Does MgO have a structure like that of NaCl or ZnS? If the density of MgO is 3.58 g/cm3, estimate the radius (in centimeters)
of the O2 anions and the Mg2 cations.
70. The CsCl structure is a simple cubic array of chloride ions with
a cesium ion at the center of each cubic array (see Exercise 61).
Given that the density of cesium chloride is 3.97 g/cm3, and assuming that the chloride and cesium ions touch along the body
diagonal of the cubic unit cell, calculate the distance between
the centers of adjacent Cs and Cl ions in the solid. Compare
this value with the expected distance based on the sizes of the
ions. The ionic radius of Cs is 169 pm, and the ionic radius of
Cl is 181 pm.

76. A mineral crystallizes in a cubic closest packed array of oxygen
ions with aluminum ions in some of the octahedral holes and
magnesium ions in some of the tetrahedral holes. Deduce the
formula of this mineral and predict the fraction of octahedral
holes and tetrahedral holes that are ﬁlled by the various cations.
77. Materials containing the elements Y, Ba, Cu, and O that are superconductors (electrical resistance equals zero) at temperatures

71. What type of solid will each of the following substances form?
a. CO2
e. Ru
i. NaOH
b. SiO2
f. I2
j. U
c. Si
g. KBr
k. CaCO3
d. CH4
h. H2O
l. PH3
72. What type of solid will each of the following substances form?
a. diamond
e. KCl
i. Ar
b. PH3
f. quartz
j. Cu
c. H2
g. NH4NO3
k. C6H12O6
d. Mg
h. SF2
73. The memory metal, nitinol, is an alloy of nickel and titanium. It
is called a memory metal because after being deformed, a piece
of nitinol wire will return to its original shape. The structure of
nitinol consists of a simple cubic array of Ni atoms and an inner penetrating simple cubic array of Ti atoms. In the extended
lattice, a Ti atom is found at the center of a cube of Ni atoms;
the reverse is also true.
a. Describe the unit cell for nitinol.
b. What is the empirical formula of nitinol?
c. What are the coordination numbers (number of nearest neighbors) of Ni and Ti in nitinol?

Barium

Oxygen

(a) Ideal perovskite structure

Copper

Yttrium

(b) Actual structure of
superconductor

Exercises
above that of liquid nitrogen were recently discovered. The structures of these materials are based on the perovskite structure. Were
they to have the ideal perovskite structure, the superconductor
would have the structure shown in part (a) of the ﬁgure above.
a. What is the formula of this ideal perovskite material?
b. How is this structure related to the perovskite structure shown
in Exercise 75?
These materials, however, do not act as superconductors unless
they are deﬁcient in oxygen. The structure of the actual superconducting phase appears to be that shown in part (b) of the ﬁgure.
c. What is the formula of this material?
78. The structures of another class of ceramic, high-temperature superconductors are shown in the ﬁgure below.
a. Determine the formula of each of these four superconductors.
b. One of the structural features that appears to be essential for
high-temperature superconductivity is the presence of planar
sheets of copper and oxygen atoms. As the number of sheets
in each unit cell increases, the temperature for the onset of
superconductivity increases. Order the four structures from
lowest to the highest superconducting temperature.
c. Assign oxidation states to Cu in each structure assuming
Tl exists as Tl3. The oxidation states of Ca, Ba, and O are
assumed to be 2, 2, and 2, respectively.
d. It also appears that copper must display a mixture of oxidation states for a material to exhibit superconductivity. Explain
how this occurs in these materials as well as in the superconductor in Exercise 77.

(a)

Ti

O

Ba

Cu

479

Phase Changes and Phase Diagrams
79. Plot the following data and determine ¢ Hvap for magnesium and
lithium. In which metal is the bonding stronger?
Temperature (°C)

Vapor Pressure
(mm Hg)

Li

Mg

1.
10.
100.
400.
760.

750.
890.
1080.
1240.
1310.

620.
740.
900.
1040.
1110.

80. From the following data for liquid nitric acid, determine its heat
of vaporization and normal boiling point.
Temperature (°C)

Vapor Pressure (mm Hg)

0.
10.
20.
30.
40.
50.
80.

14.4
26.6
47.9
81.3
133
208
670.

Ca

81. In Breckenridge, Colorado, the typical atmospheric pressure is
520. torr. What is the boiling point of water ( ¢Hvap  40.7
kJ/mol) in Breckenridge?
82. What pressure would have to be applied to steam at 350.°C to
condense the steam to liquid water ( ¢Hvap  40.7 kJ/mol)?

(b)

83. Carbon tetrachloride, CCl4, has a vapor pressure of 213 torr at 40.°C
and 836 torr at 80.°C. What is the normal boiling point of CCl4?
84. The normal boiling point for acetone is 56.5°C. At an elevation
of 5300 ft the atmospheric pressure is 630. torr. What would be
the boiling point of acetone ( ¢Hvap  32.0 kJ/mol) at this elevation? What would be the vapor pressure of acetone at 25.0°C
at this elevation?
85. A substance, X, has the following properties:
Speciﬁc
Heat Capacities
¢Hvap
¢Hfus
bp
mp

(c)

(d)

20. kJ/mol
5.0 kJ/mol
75°C
15°C

C(s)
C(l)
C(g)

3.0 J/g  °C
2.5 J/g  °C
1.0 J/g  °C

Sketch a heating curve for substance X starting at 50.°C.
86. Given the data in Exercise 85 on substance X, calculate the energy that must be removed to convert 250. g of substance X from
a gas at 100.°C to a solid at 50.°C. Assume X has a molar
mass of 75.0 g/mol.

480

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

87. How much energy does it take to convert 0.500 kg ice at 20.°C
to steam at 250.°C? Speciﬁc heat capacities: ice, 2.03 J/g  °C;
liquid, 4.2 J/g  °C; steam, 2.0 J/g  °C, ¢Hvap  40.7 kJ/mol,
¢Hfus  6.02 kJ/mol.
88. Consider a 75.0-g sample of H2O(g) at 125°C. What phase or
phases are present when 215 kJ of energy is removed from this
sample? (See Exercise 87.)
89. An ice cube tray contains enough water at 22.0°C to make 18 ice
cubes that each have a mass of 30.0 g. The tray is placed in a
freezer that uses CF2Cl2 as a refrigerant. The heat of vaporization of CF2Cl2 is 158 J/g. What mass of CF2Cl2 must be vaporized in the refrigeration cycle to convert all the water at 22.0°C
to ice at 5.0°C? The heat capacities for H2O(s) and H2O(l) are
2.03 J/g  °C and 4.18 J/g  °C, respectively, and the enthalpy of
fusion for ice is 6.02 kJ/mol.
90. A 0.250-g chunk of sodium metal is cautiously dropped into a
mixture of 50.0 g of water and 50.0 g of ice, both at 0°C. The
reaction is

How many triple points are in the phase diagram?
What phases are in equilibrium at each of the triple points?
What is the stable phase at 1 atm and 100.°C?
What are the normal melting point and the normal boiling
point of sulfur?
e. Which is the densest phase?
f. At a pressure of 1.0  105 atm, can rhombic sulfur sublime?
g. What phase changes occur when the pressure on a sample of
sulfur at 100.°C is increased from 1.0  108 atm to 1500 atm?
93. Use the accompanying phase diagram for carbon to answer the
following questions.
a. How many triple points are in the phase diagram?
b. What phases can coexist at each triple point?
c. What happens if graphite is subjected to very high pressures
at room temperature?
d. If we assume that the density increases with an increase in
pressure, which is more dense, graphite or diamond?
10 11

¢H  368 kJ

Will the ice melt? Assuming the ﬁnal mixture has a speciﬁc heat
capacity of 4.18 J/g  °C, calculate the ﬁnal temperature. The enthalpy of fusion for ice is 6.02 kJ/mol.
91. Consider the phase diagram given below. What phases are
present at points A through H? Identify the triple point, normal
boiling point, normal freezing point, and critical point. Which
phase is denser, solid or liquid?

Diamond
Liquid
Pressure (Pa)

2Na1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2NaOH1aq2  H2 1g2

a.
b.
c.
d.

10

9

Graphite
10 7
Vapor

H
0
G
B

A

F

1.0 atm
E

C

D

92. Sulfur exhibits two solid phases, rhombic and monoclinic. Use
the accompanying phase diagram for sulfur to answer the following questions. (The phase diagram is not to scale.)

Pressure

153˚C,
1420 atm
Monoclinic
95.39˚C,
1 atm

Liquid
115.21˚C,
1 atm
444.6˚C,
1 atm

1 atm
Rhombic

115.18˚C,
3.2  10–5 atm
95.31˚C,
5.1  10–6 atm
Temperature

Gas

2000

4000

6000

Temperature (K)

94. Like most substances, bromine exists in one of the three typical
phases. Br2 has a normal melting point of 7.2°C and a normal
boiling point of 59°C. The triple point for Br2 is 7.3°C and
40 torr, and the critical point is 320°C and 100 atm. Using this
information, sketch a phase diagram for bromine indicating the
points described above. Based on your phase diagram, order the
three phases from least dense to most dense. What is the stable
phase of Br2 at room temperature and 1 atm? Under what temperature conditions can liquid bromine never exist? What phase
changes occur as the temperature of a sample of bromine at
0.10 atm is increased from 50°C to 200°C?
95. The melting point of a ﬁctional substance X is 225°C at 10.0 atm.
If the density of the solid phase of X is 2.67 g/cm3 and the density of the liquid phase is 2.78 g/cm3 at 10.0 atm, predict whether
the normal melting point of X will be less than, equal to, or
greater than 225°C. Explain.
96. Consider the following data for xenon:
Triple point:
Normal melting point:
Normal boiling point:

121°C, 280 torr
112°C
107°C

Which is more dense, Xe(s), or Xe(l )? How do the melting point
and boiling point of xenon depend on pressure?

Challenge Problems

Additional Exercises
97. Rationalize why chalk (calcium carbonate) has a higher melting
point than motor oil (large compounds made from carbon and
hydrogen), which has a higher melting point than water, which
engages in relatively strong hydrogen-bonding interactions.
98. Rationalize the differences in physical properties in terms of intermolecular forces for the following organic compounds. Compare the ﬁrst three substances with each other, compare the last
three with each other, and then compare all six. Can you account
for any anomalies?
bp (°C)
Benzene, C6H6
Naphthalene,
C10H8
Carbon tetrachloride
Acetone,
CH3COCH3
Acetic acid,
CH3CO2H
Benzoic acid,
C6H5CO2H

mp (°C)

101. How could you tell experimentally if TiO2 is an ionic solid or a
network solid?
102. Boron nitride (BN) exists in two forms. The ﬁrst is a slippery
solid formed from the reaction of BCl3 with NH3, followed by
heating in an ammonia atmosphere at 750°C. Subjecting the ﬁrst
form of BN to a pressure of 85,000 atm at 1800°C produces a
second form that is the second hardest substance known. Both
forms of BN remain solids to 3000°C. Suggest structures for the
two forms of BN.
103. Consider the following data concerning four different substances.

Compound

Conducts
Electricity
as a Solid

B2H6
SiO2
CsI

no
no
no

W

yes

¢Hvap (kJ/mol)

80

6

33.9

218

80

51.5

76

23

31.8

56

95

31.8

118

17

39.7

249

122

68.2

99. Consider the following vapor pressure versus temperature plot
for three different substances A, B, and C.

Pvap (torr)

A B
C

Temperature (°C)

If the three substances are CH4, SiH4, and NH3, match each curve
to the correct substance.
100. Consider the following enthalpy changes:
F  HF ¡ FHF
¢H  155 kJ/mol
1CH3 2 2C “O  HF ¡ 1CH3 2 2C“ O --- HF
¢H  46 kJ/mol
H2O1g2  HOH1g2 ¡ H2O --- HOH 1in ice2
¢H  21 kJ/mol
How do the strengths of hydrogen bonds vary with the electronegativity of the element to which hydrogen is bonded? Where
in the preceding series would you expect hydrogen bonds of the
following type to fall?

481

Other Properties
gas at 25°C
high mp
aqueous solution
conducts electricity
high mp

Label the four substances as either ionic, network, metallic, or
molecular solids.
104. A 20.0-g sample of ice at 10.0°C is mixed with 100.0 g of water at 80.0°C. Calculate the ﬁnal temperature of the mixture assuming no heat loss to the surroundings. The heat capacities of
H2O(s) and H2O(l) are 2.03 and 4.18 J/g  °C, respectively, and
the enthalpy of fusion for ice is 6.02 kJ/mol.
105. In regions with dry climates, evaporative coolers are used to cool
air. A typical electric air conditioner is rated at 1.00  104 Btu/h
(1 Btu, or British thermal unit  amount of energy to raise the
temperature of 1 lb of water by 1°F). How much water must be
evaporated each hour to dissipate as much heat as a typical
electric air conditioner?
106. The critical point of NH3 is 132°C and 111 atm, and the critical
point of N2 is 147°C and 34 atm. Which of these substances
cannot be liqueﬁed at room temperature no matter how much
pressure is applied? Explain.

Challenge Problems
107. When 1 mol of benzene is vaporized at a constant pressure of
1.00 atm and its boiling point of 353.0 K, 30.79 kJ of energy
(heat) is absorbed and the volume change is 28.90 L. What are
¢E and ¢H for this process?
108. You and a friend each synthesize a compound with the formula
XeCl2F2. Your compound is a liquid and your friend’s compound
is a gas (at the same conditions of temperature and pressure).
Explain how the two compounds with the same formulas can
exist in different phases at the same conditions of pressure and
temperature.
109. Using the heats of fusion and vaporization for water given in Exercise 87, calculate the change in enthalpy for the sublimation
of water:
H2O1s2 ¡ H2O1g2

482

Chapter Ten Liquids and Solids

Using the ¢H value given in Exercise 100 and the number of
hydrogen bonds formed with each water molecule, estimate what
portion of the intermolecular forces in ice can be accounted for
by hydrogen bonding.
110. Oil of wintergreen, or methyl salicylate, has the following
structure:
O
C

OCH3

mp  8°C

OH
Methyl-4-hydroxybenzoate is another molecule with exactly the
same molecular formula; it has the following structure:

Account for the large difference in the melting points of the two
substances.
111. Consider the following melting point data:

115. Mn crystallizes in the same type of cubic unit cell as Cu.
Assuming that the radius of Mn is 5.6% larger than the radius
of Cu and the density of copper is 8.96 g/cm3, calculate the
density of Mn.
116. You are asked to help set up a historical display in the park by
stacking some cannonballs next to a Revolutionary War cannon.
You are told to stack them by starting with a triangle in which
each side is composed of four touching cannonballs. You are to
continue stacking them until you have a single ball on the top
centered over the middle of the triangular base.
a. How many cannonballs do you need?
b. What type of closest packing is displayed by the cannonballs?
c. The four corners of the pyramid of cannonballs form the
corners of what type of regular geometric solid?
117. Some water is placed in a sealed glass container connected to a
vacuum pump (a device used to pump gases from a container),
and the pump is turned on. The water appears to boil and then
freezes. Explain these changes using the phase diagram for water. What would happen to the ice if the vacuum pump was left
on indeﬁnitely?
118. The molar enthalpy of vaporization of water at 373 K and
1.00 atm is 40.7 kJ/mol. What fraction of this energy is used to
change the internal energy of the water, and what fraction is used
to do work against the atmosphere? (Hint: Assume that water
vapor is an ideal gas.)
119. For a simple cubic array, solve for the volume of an interior
sphere (cubic hole) in terms of the radius of a sphere in the array.
120. Consider two different compounds, each with the formula C2H6O.
One of these compounds is a liquid at room conditions and the
other is a gas. Write Lewis structures consistent with this observation and explain your answer. Hint: the oxygen atom in both structures satisﬁes the octet rule with two bonds and two lone pairs.

Compound: NaCl MgCl2 AlCl3 SiCl4 PCl3 SCl2 Cl2
mp 1°C2 :

801

Compound: NaF
mp 1°C2 :

997

708

190

MgF2 AlF3
1396

70 91 78 101
SiF4 PF5

SF6

F2

1040 90 94 56 220

Account for the trends in melting points in terms of interparticle forces.
112. MnO has either the NaCl type structure or the CsCl type structure (see Exercise 70). The edge length of the MnO unit cell is
4.47  108 cm and the density of MnO is 5.28 g/cm3.
a. Does MnO crystallize in the NaCl or the CsCl type structure?
b. Assuming that the ionic radius of oxygen is 140. pm, estimate the ionic radius of manganese.
113. Some ionic compounds contain a mixture of different charged
cations. For example, some titanium oxides contain a mixture of
Ti2 and Ti3 ions. Consider a certain oxide of titanium that is
28.31% oxygen by mass and contains a mixture of Ti2 and Ti3
ions. Determine the formula of the compound and the relative
numbers of Ti2 and Ti3 ions.
114. Spinel is a mineral that contains 37.9% aluminum, 17.1% magnesium, and 45.0% oxygen, by mass, and has a density of
3.57 g/cm3. The edge of the cubic unit cell measures 809 pm.
How many of each type of ion are present in the unit cell?

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

121. A 0.132-mol sample of an unknown semiconducting material
with the formula XY has a mass of 19.0 g. The element X has
an electron conﬁguration of [Kr]5s24d10. What is this semiconducting material? A small amount of the Y atoms in the semiconductor is replaced with an equivalent amount of atoms with
and electron conﬁguration of [Ar]4s23d104p5. Does this correspond to n-type or p-type doping?
122. A metal burns in air at 600°C under high pressure to form
an oxide with formula MO2. This compound is 23.72% oxygen by mass. The distance between touching atoms in a cubic
closest packed crystal of this metal is 269.0 pm. What is this
metal? What is its density?
123. One method of preparing elemental mercury involves roasting
cinnabar (HgS) in quicklime (CaO) at 600.°C followed by
condensation of the mercury vapor. Given the heat of vaporization of mercury (296 J/g) and the vapor pressure of mercury at
25.0°C (2.56  103 torr), what is the vapor pressure of the
condensed mercury at 300.°C? How many atoms of mercury are
present in the mercury vapor at 300.°C if the reaction is conducted in a closed 15.0-L container?

Marathon Problem

Marathon Problem
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

124. General Zod has sold Lex Luthor what Zod claims to be a new
copper-colored form of kryptonite, the only substance that can
harm Superman. Lex, not believing in honor among thieves, decided to carry out some tests on the supposed kryptonite. From
previous tests, Lex knew that kryptonite is a metal having a speciﬁc heat capacity of 0.082 J/g  °C, and a density of 9.2 g/cm3.
Lex Luthor’s ﬁrst experiment was an attempt to ﬁnd the
speciﬁc heat capacity of kryptonite. He dropped a 10 g  3 g
sample of the metal into a boiling water bath at a temperature
of 100.0°C  0.2°C. He waited until the metal had reached the
bath temperature and then quickly transferred it to 100 g  3 g
of water that was contained in a calorimeter at an initial temperature of 25.0°C  0.2°C. The ﬁnal temperature of the metal
and water was 25.2°C. Based on these results, is it possible to
distinguish between copper and kryptonite? Explain.

483

When Lex found that his results from the ﬁrst experiment
were inconclusive, he decided to determine the density of the
sample. He managed to steal a better balance and determined the
mass of another portion of the purported kryptonite to be
4 g  1 g. He dropped this sample into water contained in a
25-mL graduated cylinder and found that it displaced a volume of
0.42 mL  0.02 mL. Is the metal copper or kryptonite? Explain.
Lex was ﬁnally forced to determine the crystal structure of
the metal General Zod had given him. He found that the cubic
unit cell contained 4 atoms and had an edge length of 600. pm.
Explain how this information enabled Lex to identify the metal
as copper or kryptonite.
Will Lex be going after Superman with the kryptonite or
seeking revenge on General Zod? What improvements could he
have made in his experimental techniques to avoid performing
the crystal structure determination?
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

11 Properties of Solutions
Contents
11.1 Solution Composition
11.2 The Energies of Solution
Formation
11.3 Factors Affecting Solubility
• Structure Effects
• Pressure Effects
• Temperature Effects (for
Aqueous Solutions)
11.4 The Vapor Pressures of
Solutions
• Nonideal Solutions
11.5 Boiling-Point Elevation and
Freezing-Point Depression
• Boiling-Point Elevation
• Freezing-Point Depression
11.6 Osmotic Pressure
• Reverse Osmosis
11.7 Colligative Properties of
Electrolyte Solutions
11.8 Colloids

Opals are formed from colloidal suspensions of silica when the liquid evaporates.

484

M

ost of the substances we encounter in daily life are mixtures: Wood, milk,
gasoline, champagne, seawater, shampoo, steel, and air are common examples. When
the components of a mixture are uniformly intermingled—that is, when a mixture is
homogeneous—it is called a solution. Solutions can be gases, liquids, or solids, as shown
in Table 11.1. However, we will be concerned in this chapter with the properties of liquid
solutions, particularly those containing water. As we saw in Chapter 4, many essential
chemical reactions occur in aqueous solutions because water is capable of dissolving so
many substances.

11.1
A solute is the substance being dissolved.
The solvent is the dissolving medium.

Molarity 

moles of solute
liters of solution

Solution Composition

Because a mixture, unlike a chemical compound, has a variable composition, the relative
amounts of substances in a solution must be speciﬁed. The qualitative terms dilute (relatively little solute present) and concentrated (relatively large amount of solute) are often
used to describe solution content, but we need to deﬁne solution composition more precisely to perform calculations. For example, in dealing with the stoichiometry of solution
reactions in Chapter 4, we found it useful to describe solution composition in terms of
molarity, or the number of moles of solute per liter of solution (symbolized by M).
Other ways of describing solution composition are also useful. Mass percent (sometimes called weight percent) is the percent by mass of the solute in the solution:
Mass percent  a

When liquids are mixed, the liquid
present in the largest amount is called
the solvent.

mass of solute
b  100%
mass of solution

Another way of describing solution composition is the mole fraction (symbolized by
the Greek lowercase letter chi, x), the ratio of the number of moles of a given component
to the total number of moles of solution. For a two-component solution, where nA and nB
represent the number of moles of the two components,
Mole fraction of component A  xA 

TABLE 11.1

nA
nA  nB

Various Types of Solutions

Example
Air, natural gas
Vodka in water,
antifreeze
Brass
Carbonated water
(soda)
Seawater, sugar
solution
Hydrogen in
platinum

State of
Solution

State of
Solute

State of
Solvent

Gas
Liquid

Gas
Liquid

Gas
Liquid

Solid
Liquid

Solid
Gas

Solid
Liquid

Liquid

Solid

Liquid

Solid

Gas

Solid

485

486

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

In very dilute aqueous solutions, the
magnitude of the molality and the molarity are almost the same.

Still another way of describing solution composition is molality (symbolized by m),
the number of moles of solute per kilogram of solvent:
Molality 

Sample Exercise 11.1

moles of solute
kilogram of solvent

Various Methods for Describing Solution Composition
A solution is prepared by mixing 1.00 g ethanol (C2H5OH) with 100.0 g water to give a
ﬁnal volume of 101 mL. Calculate the molarity, mass percent, mole fraction, and molality of ethanol in this solution.
Solution

Since molarity depends on the volume
of the solution, it changes slightly with
temperature. Molality is independent of
temperature because it depends only
on mass.

Molarity: The moles of ethanol can be obtained from its molar mass (46.07 g/mol):
1 mol C2H5OH
 2.17  102 mol C2H5OH
46.07 g C2H5OH
1L
Volume  101 mL 
 0.101 L
1000 mL

1.00 g C2H5OH 

moles of C2H5OH
2.17  102 mol

liters of solution
0.101 L
 0.215 M

Molarity of C2H5OH 

Mass percent:
Mass percent C2H5OH  a

mass of C2H5OH
b  100%
mass of solution

a

1.00 g C2H5OH
b  100%
100.0 g H2O  1.00 g C2H5OH
 0.990% C2H5OH
Mole fraction:
Mole fraction of C2H5OH 

nC2H5OH
nC2H5OH  nH2O

1 mol H2O
 5.56 mol
18.0 g H2O
2.17  102 mol

2.17  102 mol  5.56 mol

nH2O  100.0 g H2O 
xC H OH
2

5



2.17  102
 0.00389
5.58

Molality:
moles of C2H5OH
2.17  102 mol

1 kg
kilogram of H2O
100.0 g 
1000 g
2.17  102 mol

0.1000 kg

Molality of C2H5OH 

 0.217 m
See Exercises 11.25 through 11.27.

11.1 Solution Composition

487

TABLE 11.2 The Molar Mass, Equivalent Mass, and Relationship of Molarity and
Normality for Several Acids and Bases
Molar
Mass

Equivalent
Mass

Relationship of Molarity
and Normality

HCl

36.5

1M1N

H2SO4

98

NaOH

40

Ca(OH)2

74

36.5
98
 49
2
40
74
 37
2

Acid or Base

The deﬁnition of an equivalent depends
on the reaction taking place in the
solution.

The quantity we call equivalent mass
here traditionally has been called equivalent weight.

Oxidation–reduction half-reactions were
discussed in Section 4.10.

1M2N
1M1N
1M2N

Another concentration measure sometimes encountered is normality (symbolized
by N). Normality is deﬁned as the number of equivalents per liter of solution, where the
deﬁnition of an equivalent depends on the reaction taking place in the solution. For an
acid–base reaction, the equivalent is the mass of acid or base that can furnish or accept
exactly 1 mole of protons (H ions). In Table 11.2 note, for example, that the equivalent
mass of sulfuric acid is the molar mass divided by 2, since each mole of H2SO4 can furnish 2 moles of protons. The equivalent mass of calcium hydroxide is also half the molar mass, since each mole of Ca(OH)2 contains 2 moles of OH ions that can react with
2 moles of protons. The equivalent is deﬁned so that 1 equivalent of acid will react with
exactly 1 equivalent of base.
For oxidation–reduction reactions, the equivalent is deﬁned as the quantity of oxidizing
or reducing agent that can accept or furnish 1 mole of electrons. Thus 1 equivalent of reducing
agent will react with exactly 1 equivalent of oxidizing agent. The equivalent mass of an oxidizing or reducing agent can be calculated from the number of electrons in its half-reaction.
For example, MnO4 reacting in acidic solution absorbs ﬁve electrons to produce Mn2:
MnO4  5e  8H  ¡ Mn2  4H2O
Since the MnO4 ion present in 1 mole of KMnO4 consumes 5 moles of electrons, the
equivalent mass is the molar mass divided by 5:
Equivalent mass of KMnO4 

Sample Exercise 11.2

158 g
molar mass

 31.6 g
5
5

Calculating Various Methods of Solution Composition
from the Molarity
The electrolyte in automobile lead storage batteries is a 3.75 M sulfuric acid solution that
has a density of 1.230 g/mL. Calculate the mass percent, molality, and normality of the
sulfuric acid.
Solution
The density of the solution in grams per liter is
1.230

g
1000 mL

 1.230  103 g/L
mL
1L

Thus 1 liter of this solution contains 1230. g of the mixture of sulfuric acid and water.
Since the solution is 3.75 M, we know that 3.75 mol H2SO4 is present per liter of solution. The number of grams of H2SO4 present is
A modern 12-volt lead storage battery of
the type used in automobiles.

3.75 mol 

98.1 g H2SO4
 368 g H2SO4
1 mol

488

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Electronic Ink
he printed page has been a primary means of communication for over 3000 years, and researchers at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) believe they
have discovered why. It seems that the brain responds positively to ﬁxed images on a sheet of paper, particularly
those areas of the brain that store and process “spatial
maps.” In comparison, information displayed on computer
screens or TV screens seems to lack some of the visual
signals that stimulate the learning centers of the brain to
retain knowledge. While modern technology provides us
with many other media by which we can communicate,
the appeal of written words on a piece of paper remains.
Surprisingly, the technology of printing has changed very
little since the invention of the printing press—that is, until
now.
In the past several years Joseph M. Jacobson and his
students at MIT have developed a prototype of a self-printing

T

page. The key to this self-printing “paper” is microencapsulation technology—the same technology that is used in
“carbonless” carbon paper and “scratch-and-sniff” cologne
and perfume advertisements in magazines. Jacobson’s system involves the use of millions of transparent ﬂuid-ﬁlled
capsules containing microscopic particles. These particles
are colored and positively charged on one side and white
and negatively charged on the other. When an electric ﬁeld
is selectively applied to the capsules, the white side of the
microparticles can be oriented upward or the colored side
can be caused to ﬂip up. Appropriate application of an
electric ﬁeld can orient the particles in such a way as to
produce words, and once the words have been created,
virtually no more energy is needed to keep the particles in
place. An image can be maintained on a page with consumption of only 50 millionths of an amp of power! The
entire display is about 200 mm thick (2.5 times that of paper)

The amount of water present in 1 liter of solution is obtained from the difference
1230. g solution  368 g H2SO4  862 g H2O
Since we now know the masses of the solute and solvent, we can calculate the mass percent.
Mass percent H2SO4 

368 g
mass of H2SO4
 100% 
 100%
mass of solution
1230. g

 29.9% H2SO4
From the moles of solute and the mass of solvent we can calculate the molality.
Molality of H2SO4 


moles H2SO4
kilogram of H2O
3.75 mol H2SO4
 4.35 m
1 kg H2O
862 g H2O 
1000 g H2O

Since each sulfuric acid molecule can furnish two protons, 1 mol H2SO4 represents
2 equivalents. Thus a solution with 3.75 mol H2SO4 per liter contains 2  3.75  7.50
equivalents per liter, and the normality is 7.50 N.
See Exercise 11.31.

11.2

The Energies of Solution Formation

Dissolving solutes in liquids is very common. We dissolve salt in the water used to cook
vegetables, sugar in iced tea, stains in cleaning ﬂuid, gaseous carbon dioxide in water to
make soda water, ethanol in gasoline to make gasohol, and so on.

11.2 The Energies of Solution Formation

489

and is so ﬂexible and durable that it can be curled around a
pencil and can operate at temperatures from 4 to 158°F.
Presently, print resolution is not as good as a modern laser
printer, but reduction of the microencapsulated particles
from 50 to 40 mm should produce print that rivals the quality
of the laser printer.
The ﬁrst commercial applications of this technology
are expected to appear in retail stores across the country
in the form of electronic signs that can be updated instantly
from a central location. The present technology is a long
way from being able to create electronic books, but this is
the eventual goal of Jacobson’s research team. It seems
very likely that this electronic ink technology will contribute greatly to the evolution of the printed page over the
next century.
Signs like this one created by E Ink are the ﬁrst to use electronic ink,
which can be updated from a computer inside the store or from a
remote location.

DDT

Polar solvents dissolve polar solutes;
nonpolar solvents dissolve nonpolar
solutes.

Solubility is important in other ways. For example, because the pesticide DDT is
fat-soluble, it is retained and concentrated in animal tissues, where it causes detrimental
effects. This is why DDT, even though it is effective for killing mosquitos, has been
banned in the United States. Also, the solubility of various vitamins is important in
determining correct dosages. The insolubility of barium sulfate means it can be used
safely to improve X rays of the gastrointestinal tract, even though Ba2 ions are quite
toxic.
What factors affect solubility? The cardinal rule of solubility is like dissolves like. We
ﬁnd that we must use a polar solvent to dissolve a polar or ionic solute and a nonpolar
solvent to dissolve a nonpolar solute. Now we will try to understand why this behavior
occurs. To simplify the discussion, we will assume that the formation of a liquid solution
takes place in three distinct steps.

➥1
➥2
➥3

The enthalpy of solution is the sum of the
energies used in expanding both solvent
and solute and the energy of solvent–
solute interaction.

Separating the solute into its individual components (expanding the solute).
Overcoming intermolecular forces in the solvent to make room for the solute
(expanding the solvent).
Allowing the solute and solvent to interact to form the solution.

These steps are illustrated in Fig. 11.1. Steps 1 and 2 require energy, since forces
must be overcome to expand the solute and solvent. Step 3 usually releases energy. In
other words, steps 1 and 2 are endothermic, and step 3 is often exothermic. The enthalpy
change associated with the formation of the solution, called the enthalpy (heat) of solution ( ¢Hsoln), is the sum of the ¢H values for the steps:
¢Hsoln  ¢H1  ¢H2  ¢H3
where ¢Hsoln may have a positive sign (energy absorbed) or a negative sign (energy released), as shown in Fig. 11.2.

490

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

Step 1
∆H1
Solute

Step 3

Expanded solute

∆H3
Step 2
∆H2
Solvent

Expanded solvent

FIGURE 11.1
The formation of a liquid solution can
be divided into three steps: (1) expanding
the solute, (2) expanding the solvent, and
(3) combining the expanded solute and
solvent to form the solution.

H1 is expected to be small for nonpolar
solutes but can be large for large
molecules.

Solution

∆H1 + ∆H2 + ∆H3
∆Hsoln

To illustrate the importance of the various energy terms in the equation for ¢Hsoln, we
will consider two speciﬁc cases. First, we know that oil is not soluble in water. When oil
tankers leak, the petroleum forms an oil slick that ﬂoats on the water and is eventually
carried onto the beaches. We can explain the immiscibility of oil and water by considering the energy terms involved. Oil is a mixture of nonpolar molecules that interact through
London dispersion forces, which depend on molecule size. We expect ¢H1 to be small
for a typical nonpolar solute, but it will be relatively large for the large oil molecules. The
term H3 will be small, since interactions between the nonpolar solute molecules and the
polar water molecules will be negligible. However, H2 will be large and positive because
it takes considerable energy to overcome the hydrogen bonding forces among the water
molecules to expand the solvent. Thus ¢Hsoln will be large and positive because of the
¢H1 and ¢H2 terms. Since a large amount of energy would have to be expended to form
an oil–water solution, this process does not occur to any appreciable extent. These same
arguments hold true for any nonpolar solute and polar solvent—the combination of a nonpolar solute and a highly polar solvent is not expected to produce a solution.

∆H3
∆H1
+ ∆H2
∆H3
Energy of separated
solute and solvent

Energy (H)

FIGURE 11.2
The heat of solution (a) Hsoln has a negative sign (the process is exothermic) if step
3 releases more energy than that required
by steps 1 and 2. (b) Hsoln has a positive
sign (the process is endothermic) if steps 1
and 2 require more energy than is released
in step 3. (If the energy changes for steps 1
and 2 equal that for step 3, then Hsoln is
zero.)

Energy (H)

∆H1 + ∆H2

∆Hsoln
Energy of
solution
(a)

(b)

Energy of
solution
∆Hsoln

Energy of separated
solute and solvent

11.2 The Energies of Solution Formation

491

As a second case, let’s consider the solubility of an ionic solute, such as sodium chloride, in water. Here the term ¢H1 is large and positive because the strong ionic forces in
the crystal must be overcome, and ¢H2 is large and positive because hydrogen bonds must
be broken in the water. Finally, ¢H3 is large and negative because of the strong interactions between the ions and the water molecules. In fact, the exothermic and endothermic
terms essentially cancel, as shown from the known values:
NaCl1s2 ¡ Na  1g2  Cl  1g2
H2O1l2  Na  1g2  Cl  1g2 ¡ Na  1aq2  Cl  1aq2

¢H1  786 kJ/mol
¢Hhyd  ¢H2  ¢H3
 783 kJ/mol

Here the enthalpy (heat) of hydration ( ¢ Hhyd) combines the terms ¢ H2 (for expanding the solvent) and ¢ H3 (for solvent–solute interactions). The heat of hydration
represents the enthalpy change associated with the dispersal of a gaseous solute in
water. Thus the heat of solution for dissolving sodium chloride is the sum of ¢ H1 and
¢ Hhyd:
¢Hsoln  786 kJ/mol  783 kJ/mol  3 kJ/mol

Gasoline ﬂoating on water. Since gasoline is
nonpolar, it is immiscible with water, because water contains polar molecules.

Note that ¢ Hsoln is small but positive; the dissolving process requires a small amount
of energy. Then why is NaCl so soluble in water? The answer lies in nature’s tendency
toward higher probability of the mixed state. That is, processes naturally run in the direction that leads to the most probable state. For example, imagine equal numbers of orange and yellow spheres separated by a partition, as shown in Fig. 11.3(a). If we remove
the partition and shake the container, the spheres will mix [Fig. 11.3(b)], and no amount
of shaking will cause them to return to the state of separated orange and yellow. Why?
The mixed state is simply much more likely to occur (more probable) than the original
separate state because there are many more ways of placing the spheres to give a mixed
state than a separated state. This is a general principle. One factor that favors a process
is an increase in probability.
But energy considerations are also important. Processes that require large amounts
of energy tend not to occur. Since dissolving 1 mole of solid NaCl requires only a small
amount of energy, the solution forms, presumably because of the large increase in the
probability of the state when the solute and solvent are mixed.
The various possible cases for solution formation are summarized in Table 11.3. Note
that in two cases, polar–polar and nonpolar–nonpolar, the heat of solution is expected to
be small. In these cases, the solution forms because of the increase in the probability of
the mixed state. In the other cases (polar–nonpolar and nonpolar–polar), the heat of solution is expected to be large and positive, and the large quantity of energy required acts
to prevent the solution from forming. Although this discussion has greatly oversimpliﬁed
the complex driving forces for solubility, these ideas are a useful starting point for understanding the observation that like dissolves like.

FIGURE 11.3
(a) Orange and yellow spheres separated by
a partition in a closed container. (b) The
spheres after the partition is removed and
the container has been shaken for some
time.

(a)

The factors that act as driving forces for
a process are discussed more fully in
Chapter 16.

(b)

492

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

TABLE 11.3

The Energy Terms for Various Types of Solutes and Solvents
H1

Polar solute,
polar solvent
Nonpolar solute,
polar solvent
Nonpolar solute,
nonpolar solvent
Polar solute,
nonpolar solvent

Sample Exercise 11.3

H2

H3

Large

Large

Small

Large

Large,
negative
Small

Small

Small

Small

Large

Small

Small

Hsoln
Small
Large,
positive
Small
Large,
positive

Outcome
Solution
forms
No solution
forms
Solution
forms
No solution
forms

Differentiating Solvent Properties
Decide whether liquid hexane (C6H14) or liquid methanol (CH3OH) is the more appropriate solvent for the substances grease (C20H42) and potassium iodide (KI).
Solution

Hexane

Hexane is a nonpolar solvent because it contains COH bonds. Thus hexane will work
best for the nonpolar solute grease. Methanol has an OOH group that makes it signiﬁcantly polar. Thus it will serve as the better solvent for the ionic solid KI.
See Exercises 11.37 through 11.39.

Liquid methanol

11.3
Grease

Visualization: Ammonia
Fountain

Visualization: Micelle
Formation: The Cleansing
Action of Soap

Factors Affecting Solubility

Structure Effects
In the last section we saw that solubility is favored if the solute and solvent have similar
polarities. Since it is the molecular structure that determines polarity, there should be a
deﬁnite connection between structure and solubility. Vitamins provide an excellent example of the relationship among molecular structure, polarity, and solubility.
Recently, there has been considerable publicity about the pros and cons of consuming large quantities of vitamins. For example, large doses of vitamin C have been advocated to combat various illnesses, including the common cold. Vitamin E has been extolled as a youth-preserving elixir and a protector against the carcinogenic (cancer-causing)
effects of certain chemicals. However, there are possible detrimental effects from taking
large amounts of some vitamins, depending on their solubilities.
Vitamins can be divided into two classes: fat-soluble (vitamins A, D, E, and K) and
water-soluble (vitamins B and C). The reason for the differing solubility characteristics
can be seen by comparing the structures of vitamins A and C (Fig. 11.4). Vitamin A, composed mostly of carbon and hydrogen atoms that have similar electronegativities, is virtually nonpolar. This causes it to be soluble in nonpolar materials such as body fat, which
is also largely composed of carbon and hydrogen, but not soluble in polar solvents such
as water. On the other hand, vitamin C has many polar O—H and C—O bonds, making
the molecule polar and thus water-soluble. We often describe nonpolar materials such as
vitamin A as hydrophobic (water-fearing) and polar substances such as vitamin C as hydrophilic (water-loving).
Because of their solubility characteristics, the fat-soluble vitamins can build up in the
fatty tissues of the body. This has both positive and negative effects. Since these vitamins

11.3 Factors Affecting Solubility

Vitamin A

Vitamin C

CH3 CH3
H
H
H
H

C
C

C

C

C

CH3

H

CH3

H

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

H

H

H

H

O H

O H H

O
O

C

C

H

C
C

H O

C

H

C O H
H H

O H

CH3

C
H

H

493

H

FIGURE 11.4
The molecular structures of (a) vitamin A (nonpolar, fat-soluble) and (b) vitamin C (polar, water-soluble). The circles in the structural formulas
indicate polar bonds. Note that vitamin C contains far more polar bonds than vitamin A.

can be stored, the body can tolerate for a time a diet deﬁcient in vitamins A, D, E, or K.
Conversely, if excessive amounts of these vitamins are consumed, their buildup can lead
to the illness hypervitaminosis.
In contrast, the water-soluble vitamins are excreted by the body and must be consumed regularly. This fact was ﬁrst recognized when the British navy discovered that
scurvy, a disease often suffered by sailors, could be prevented if the sailors regularly ate
fresh limes (which are a good source of vitamin C) when aboard ship (hence the name
“limey” for the British sailor).

Pressure Effects

Carbonation in a bottle of soda.

While pressure has little effect on the solubilities of solids or liquids, it does signiﬁcantly increase the solubility of a gas. Carbonated beverages, for example, are always
bottled at high pressures of carbon dioxide to ensure a high concentration of carbon dioxide in the liquid. The ﬁzzing that occurs when you open a can of soda results from the escape of gaseous carbon dioxide because under these conditions the
pressure of CO2 above the solution is now much lower than that used in the bottling
process.
The increase in gas solubility with pressure can be understood from Fig. 11.5.
Figure 11.5(a) shows a gas in equilibrium with a solution; that is, the gas molecules
are entering and leaving the solution at the same rate. If the pressure is suddenly
increased [Fig. 11.5(b)], the number of gas molecules per unit volume increases, and
the gas enters the solution at a higher rate than it leaves. As the concentration of dissolved gas increases, the rate of the escape of the gas also increases until a new equilibrium is reached [Fig. 11.5(c)], where the solution contains more dissolved gas than
before.

494

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Ionic Liquids?
o far in this text, you have seen that ionic substances are
stable solids with high melting points. For example,
sodium chloride has a melting point near 800°C. One of
the “hottest” areas of current chemical research is ionic
liquids—substances composed of ions that are liquids at normal temperatures and pressures. This unusual behavior results from the differences in the sizes of the anions and
cations in the ionic liquids. Dozens of small anions, such as
BF4  (tetraﬂuoroborate) or PF6  (hexaﬂuorophosphate),
can be paired with thousands of large cations, such as 1-hexyl3-methylimidazolium or 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium (parts
a and b respectively, in the accompanying ﬁgure). These substances remain liquids because the bulky, asymmetrical
cations do not pack together efﬁciently with the smaller,

S

symmetrical anions. In contrast, in sodium chloride the ions
can pack very efﬁciently to form a compact, orderly arrangement, leading to maximum cation–anion attractions and thus
a high melting point.
The excitement being generated by these ionic liquids
arises from many factors. For one thing, almost an inﬁnite
variety of ionic liquids are possible due to the large variety
of bulky cations and small anions available. According to
Kenneth R. Seddon, Director of QUILL (Queen’s University
Ionic Liquid Laboratory) in Northern Ireland, a trillion ionic
liquids are possible. Another great advantage of these liquids
is their long liquid range, typically from 100°C to 200°C.
In addition, the cations in the liquids can be designed
to perform speciﬁc functions. For example, chemist James

The relationship between gas pressure and the concentration of dissolved gas is given
by Henry’s law:
C  kP

William Henry (1774–1836), a close
friend of John Dalton, formulated his law
in 1801.
Henry’s law holds only when there is no
chemical reaction between the solute and
solvent.

FIGURE 11.5
(a) A gaseous solute in equilibrium with a
solution. (b) The piston is pushed in, which
increases the pressure of the gas and the
number of gas molecules per unit volume.
This causes an increase in the rate at which
the gas enters the solution, so the concentration of dissolved gas increases. (c) The
greater gas concentration in the solution
causes an increase in the rate of escape. A
new equilibrium is reached.

where C represents the concentration of the dissolved gas, k is a constant characteristic
of a particular solution, and P represents the partial pressure of the gaseous solute above
the solution. In words, Henry’s law states that the amount of a gas dissolved in a solution is directly proportional to the pressure of the gas above the solution.
Henry’s law is obeyed most accurately for dilute solutions of gases that do not dissociate in or react with the solvent. For example, Henry’s law is obeyed by oxygen gas
in water, but it does not correctly represent the behavior of gaseous hydrogen chloride in
water because of the dissociation reaction
HCl1g2 ¡ H  1aq2  Cl  1aq2
H2O

Solution
(a)

(b)

(c)

11.3 Factors Affecting Solubility

H. Davis, of the University of South Alabama in Mobile, has
designed various cations that will attract potentially harmful ions such as mercury, cadmium, uranium, and americium
(the latter two are commonly found in nuclear waste materials) and leach them out of contaminated solutions. Davis
has also developed cations that will remove H2S (which produces SO2 when the gas is burned) and CO2 (which does
not burn) from natural gas. Potentially, these ionic solutions
might also be used to remove CO2 from the exhaust gases
of fossil-fuel–burning power plants to lessen the “greenhouse effect.”
The biggest obstacle to the widespread use of ionic liquids is their cost. Normal organic solvents used in industry
typically cost a few cents per liter, but ionic liquids can cost
hundreds of times that amount. However, the environmentally friendly nature of ionic liquids (they produce no vapors because the ions are not volatile) and the ﬂexibility of

Sample Exercise 11.4

495

(b)

(a)

these substances as reaction media make them very attractive. As a consequence, efforts are under way to make their
use economically feasible.
The term ionic liquid may have seemed like an oxymoron in the past, but these substances have a very promising future.

Calculations Using Henry’s Law
A certain soft drink is bottled so that a bottle at 25°C contains CO2 gas at a pressure of
5.0 atm over the liquid. Assuming that the partial pressure of CO2 in the atmosphere is
4.0  104 atm, calculate the equilibrium concentrations of CO2 in the soda both before
and after the bottle is opened. The Henry’s law constant for CO2 in aqueous solution is
3.1  102 mol/L  atm at 25°C.
Solution
We can write Henry’s law for CO2 as
CCO2  kCO2PCO2
where kCO2  3.1  102 mol/L  atm. In the unopened bottle, PCO2  5.0 atm and
CCO2  kCO2PCO2  13.1  102 mol/L  atm215.0 atm2  0.16 mol/L

In the opened bottle, the CO2 in the soda eventually reaches equilibrium with the atmospheric CO2, so PCO2  4.0  104 atm and
CCO2  kCO2PCO2  a3.1  102

mol
b14.0  104 atm2  1.2  105 mol/L
L  atm

Note the large change in concentration of CO2. This is why soda goes “ﬂat” after being
open for a while.
See Exercises 11.43 and 11.44.

H soln refers to the formation of a 1.0 M
ideal solution and is not necessarily relevant to the process of dissolving a solid
in a saturated solution. Thus H soln is of
limited use in predicting the variation of
solubility with temperature.

Temperature Effects (for Aqueous Solutions)
Everyday experiences of dissolving substances such as sugar may lead you to think that
solubility always increases with temperature. This is not the case. The dissolving of a
solid occurs more rapidly at higher temperatures, but the amount of solid that can be dissolved may increase or decrease with increasing temperature. The effect of temperature

496

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

300

Sugar
(C12H22 O11)

Solubility (g solute/100 g H2O)

260
KNO 3
220
180
140

NaNO 3
NaBr

100

KBr
Na 2 SO4

60
20
0

KCl

Ce 2(SO4)3
0

20

40
60
80
Temperature (°C)

100

FIGURE 11.6
The solubilities of several solids as a function of temperature. Note that while most
substances become more soluble in water
with increasing temperature, sodium sulfate
and cerium sulfate become less soluble.

on the solubility in water of several solids is shown in Fig. 11.6. Note that although
the solubility of most solids in water increases with temperature, the solubilities of some
substances (such as sodium sulfate and cerium sulfate) decrease with increasing
temperature.
Predicting the temperature dependence of solubility is very difﬁcult. For example, although there is some correlation between the sign of Hsoln and the variation of solubility with temperature, important exceptions exist.* The only sure way to determine the
temperature dependence of a solid’s solubility is by experiment.
The behavior of gases dissolving in water appears less complex. The solubility of a
gas in water typically decreases with increasing temperature,† as is shown for several
cases in Fig. 11.7. This temperature effect has important environmental implications because of the widespread use of water from lakes and rivers for industrial cooling. After
being used, the water is returned to its natural source at a higher than ambient temperature (thermal pollution has occurred). Because it is warmer, this water contains less than
the normal concentration of oxygen and is also less dense; it tends to “ﬂoat” on the colder
water below, thus blocking normal oxygen absorption. This effect can be especially important in deep lakes. The warm upper layer can seriously decrease the amount of oxygen available to aquatic life in the deeper layers of the lake.
The decreasing solubility of gases with increasing temperature is also responsible
for the formation of boiler scale. As we will see in more detail in Chapter 14, the
bicarbonate ion is formed when carbon dioxide is dissolved in water containing the
carbonate ion:
CO32 1aq2  CO2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2HCO3 1aq2
When the water also contains Ca2 ions, this reaction is especially important—calcium
bicarbonate is soluble in water, but calcium carbonate is insoluble. When the water is
heated, the carbon dioxide is driven off. For the system to replace the lost carbon dioxide, the reverse reaction must occur:
2HCO3 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2  CO2 1aq2  CO32 1aq2
This reaction, however, also increases the concentration of carbonate ions, causing solid
calcium carbonate to form. This solid is the boiler scale that coats the walls of containers such as industrial boilers and tea kettles. Boiler scale reduces the efﬁciency of heat
transfer and can lead to blockage of pipes (see Fig. 11.8).

Methane

Solubility (10–3 mol/L)

2.0
Oxygen

Carbon
monoxide
1.0
Nitrogen
Helium

0

10
20
Temperature (°C)

30

FIGURE 11.7
The solubilities of several gases in water as
a function of temperature at a constant
pressure of 1 atm of gas above the solution.

FIGURE 11.8
A pipe with accumulated mineral deposits. The cross section clearly indicates
the reduction in pipe capacity.

*For more information see R. S. Treptow, “Le Châtelier’s Principle Applied to the Temperature Dependence of Solubility,” J. Chem. Ed. 61 (1984): 499.
†The opposite behavior is observed for most nonaqueous solvents.

11.4 The Vapor Pressures of Solutions

497

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Lake Nyos Tragedy
n August 21, 1986, a cloud of gas suddenly boiled from
Lake Nyos in Cameroon, killing nearly 2000 people.
Although at ﬁrst it was speculated that the gas was hydrogen sulﬁde, it now seems clear it was carbon dioxide. What
would cause Lake Nyos to emit this huge, suffocating cloud
of CO2? Although the answer may never be known for certain, many scientists believe that the lake suddenly “turned
over,” bringing to the surface water that contained huge
quantities of dissolved carbon dioxide. Lake Nyos is a deep
lake that is thermally stratiﬁed: Layers of warm, less dense
water near the surface ﬂoat on the colder, denser water layers near the lake’s bottom. Under normal conditions the lake
stays this way; there is little mixing among the different layers. Scientists believe that over hundreds or thousands of
years, carbon dioxide gas had seeped into the cold water at
the lake’s bottom and dissolved in great amounts because of
the large pressure of CO2 present (in accordance with
Henry’s law). For some reason on August 21, 1986, the lake
apparently suffered an overturn, possibly due to wind or to
unusual cooling of the lake’s surface by monsoon clouds.
This caused water that was greatly supersaturated with CO2
to reach the surface and release tremendous quantities of
gaseous CO2 that suffocated thousands of humans and animals before they knew what hit them—a tragic, monumental illustration of Henry’s law.

O

11.4

A nonvolatile solute has no tendency to
escape from solution into the vapor
phase.

Lake Nyos in Cameroon.

Since 1986 the scientists studying Lake Nyos and
nearby Lake Monoun have observed a rapid recharging of
the CO2 levels in the deep waters of these lakes, causing
concern that another deadly gas release could occur at any
time. Apparently the only way to prevent such a disaster is
to pump away the CO2-charged deep water in the two lakes.
Scientists at a conference to study this problem in 1994 recommended such a solution, but it has not yet been funded
by Cameroon.

The Vapor Pressures of Solutions

Liquid solutions have physical properties signiﬁcantly different from those of the pure
solvent, a fact that has great practical importance. For example, we add antifreeze to the
water in a car’s cooling system to prevent freezing in winter and boiling in summer. We
also melt ice on sidewalks and streets by spreading salt. These preventive measures work
because of the solute’s effect on the solvent’s properties.
To explore how a nonvolatile solute affects a solvent, we will consider the experiment represented in Fig. 11.9, in which a sealed container encloses a beaker containing
an aqueous sulfuric acid solution and a beaker containing pure water. Gradually, the volume
of the sulfuric acid solution increases and the volume of the pure water decreases. Why?
We can explain this observation if the vapor pressure of the pure solvent is greater than
that of the solution. Under these conditions, the pressure of vapor necessary to achieve
equilibrium with the pure solvent is greater than that required to reach equilibrium with
the aqueous acid solution. Thus, as the pure solvent emits vapor to attempt to reach equilibrium, the aqueous sulfuric acid solution absorbs vapor to try to lower the vapor pressure toward its equilibrium value. This process results in a net transfer of water from the
pure water through the vapor phase to the sulfuric acid solution. The system can reach an
equilibrium vapor pressure only when all the water is transferred to the solution. This

498

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

Water
vapor

FIGURE 11.9
An aqueous solution and pure water in
a closed environment. (a) Initial stage.
(b) After a period of time, the water is
transferred to the solution.

Visualization: Vapor Pressure
Lowering: Liquid/Vapor
Equilibrium
Visualization: Vapor Pressure
Lowering: Addition of a Solute
Visualization: Vapor Pressure
Lowering: Solution/Vapor
Equilibrium

Water

Aqueous
solution

(a)

(b)

experiment is just one of many observations indicating that the presence of a nonvolatile
solute lowers the vapor pressure of a solvent.
We can account for this behavior in terms of the simple model shown in Fig. 11.10.
The dissolved nonvolatile solute decreases the number of solvent molecules per unit volume and it should proportionately lower the escaping tendency of the solvent molecules.
For example, in a solution consisting of half nonvolatile solute molecules and half solvent molecules, we might expect the observed vapor pressure to be half that of the pure
solvent, since only half as many molecules can escape. In fact, this is what is observed.
Detailed studies of the vapor pressures of solutions containing nonvolatile solutes
were carried out by François M. Raoult (1830–1901). His results are described by the
equation known as Raoult’s law:
Psoln  xsolventP0solvent
where Psoln is the observed vapor pressure of the solution, xsolvent is the mole fraction of
0
solvent, and Psolvent
is the vapor pressure of the pure solvent. Note that for a solution of
half solute and half solvent molecules, xsolvent is 0.5, so the vapor pressure of the solution
is half that of the pure solvent. On the other hand, for a solution in which three-fourths
0
. The idea
of the solution molecules are solvent, xsolvent  34  0.75, and Psoln  0.75Psolvent
is that the nonvolatile solute simply dilutes the solvent.

6
5

FIGURE 11.10
The presence of a nonvolatile solute inhibits the escape of solvent molecules from
the liquid and so lowers the vapor pressure
of the solvent.

Aqueous
solution

1
4

2
3

Pure solvent

6
5

1
4

2
3

Solution with a
nonvolatile solute

11.4 The Vapor Pressures of Solutions
Raoult’s law states that the vapor pressure of a solution is directly proportional
to the mole fraction of solvent present.

Raoult’s law is a linear equation of the form y  mx  b, where y  Psoln, x 
0
xsolvent, m  Psolvent
, and b  0. Thus a plot of Psoln versus xsolvent gives a straight line with
0
a slope equal to Psolvent, as shown in Fig. 11.11.

Calculating the Vapor Pressure of a Solution
Calculate the expected vapor pressure at 25°C for a solution prepared by dissolving 158.0 g
of common table sugar (sucrose, molar mass  342.3 g/mol) in 643.5 cm3 of water. At
25°C, the density of water is 0.9971 g/cm3 and the vapor pressure is 23.76 torr.

Vapor pressure
of pure solvent

Solution
We will use Raoult’s law in the form

Psoln

Solution vapor pressure

Sample Exercise 11.5

499

Psoln  xH2OP0H2O
To calculate the mole fraction of water in the solution, we must ﬁrst determine the number of moles of sucrose:
0

1 mol sucrose
342.3 g sucrose
 0.4616 mol sucrose

Moles of sucrose  158.0 g sucrose 

1
Mole fraction of solvent
χ solvent

FIGURE 11.11
For a solution that obeys Raoult’s law, a
plot of Psoln versus solvent gives a straight
line.

To determine the moles of water present, we ﬁrst convert volume to mass using the density:
643.5 cm3 H2O 

0.9971 g H2O
 641.6 g H2O
cm3 H2O

The number of moles of water is therefore
641.6 g H2O 

1 mol H2O
 35.63 mol H2O
18.01 g H2O

The mole fraction of water in the solution is
xH O 
2

Then

mol H2O
35.63 mol

mol H2O  mol sucrose
35.63 mol  0.4616 mol
35.63 mol
 0.9873
36.09 mol
Psoln  xH2OP0H2O  10.98732123.76 torr2  23.46 torr

Thus the vapor pressure of water has been lowered from 23.76 torr in the pure state to
23.46 torr in the solution. The vapor pressure has been lowered by 0.30 torr.
See Exercises 11.45 and 11.46.

The lowering of vapor pressure depends
on the number of solute particles present
in the solution.

The phenomenon of the lowering of the vapor pressure gives us a convenient way to
“count” molecules and thus provides a means for experimentally determining molar
masses. Suppose a certain mass of a compound is dissolved in a solvent and the vapor
pressure of the resulting solution is measured. Using Raoult’s law, we can determine the
number of moles of solute present. Since the mass of this number of moles is known, we
can calculate the molar mass.
We also can use vapor pressure measurements to characterize solutions. For example, 1 mole of sodium chloride dissolved in water lowers the vapor pressure approximately
twice as much as expected because the solid has two ions per formula unit, which separate when it dissolves. Thus vapor pressure measurements can give valuable information
about the nature of the solute after it dissolves.

500

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Spray Power
roducts in aerosol cans are widely used in our society.
We use hairsprays, mouth sprays, shaving cream,
whipped cream, spray paint, spray cleaners, and many others. As in the case of most consumer products, chemistry
plays an important role in making aerosol products work.
An aerosol is a mixture of small particles (solids or liquids) dispersed in some sort of medium (a gas or a liquid). An

inspection of the ingredients in an aerosol can reveals a long
list of chemical substances, all of which fall into one of three
categories: (1) an active ingredient, (2) an inactive ingredient,
or (3) a propellant. The active ingredients perform the functions for which the product was purchased (for example, the
resins in hairspray). It is very important that the contents of an
aerosol can be chemically compatible. If an undesired chemical reaction were to occur inside the can, it is likely that the
product would be unable to perform its function. The inactive
ingredients serve to keep the product properly mixed and prevent chemical reactions within the can prior to application. The
propellant delivers the product out of the can.
Most aerosol products contain liqueﬁed hydrocarbon propellants* such as propane (C3H8) and butane (C4H10). While
these molecules are extremely ﬂammable, they are excellent
propellants, and they also help to disperse and mix the components of the aerosol can as they are delivered. These propellants have critical temperatures above room temperature,

P

*For foods delivered by aerosol cans, propane and butane are obviously not appropriate propellants. For substances such as whipped
cream, the propellant N2O is often used.

Insecticide is sprayed from an aerosol can.

Sample Exercise 11.6

Calculating the Vapor Pressure of a Solution Containing
Ionic Solute
Predict the vapor pressure of a solution prepared by mixing 35.0 g solid Na2SO4 (molar
mass  142 g/mol) with 175 g water at 25°C. The vapor pressure of pure water at 25°C
is 23.76 torr.
Solution
First, we need to know the mole fraction of H2O.
nH2O  175 g H2O 
nNa2SO4  35.0 g Na2SO4 

1 mol H2O
 9.72 mol H2O
18.0 g H2O
1 mol Na2SO4
 0.246 mol Na2SO4
142 g Na2SO4

It is essential to recognize that when 1 mole of solid Na2SO4 dissolves, it produces 2 mol
Na+ ions and 1 mol SO42 ions. Thus the number of solute particles present in this solution is three times the number of moles of solute dissolved:

xH O 
2

nsolute  310.2462  0.738 mol
9.72 mol
9.72


 0.929
 nH2O
0.738 mol  9.72 mol
10.458

nH2O
nsolute

11.4 The Vapor Pressures of Solutions

which means that the intermolecular forces among their molecules are strong enough to form a liquid when pressure is
applied. In the highly pressurized aerosol can, the liquid phase
of the propellant is in equilibrium with the gaseous phase of
the propellant in the head space of the can. The ability of the
propellant to maintain this equilibrium is the key to how the
aerosol can works. All aerosol cans are constructed in a similar way (see accompanying diagram). At the top of the can
is a valve (acts to open and seal the can) and an actuator (to
open the valve). Pushing the actuator opens the valve, and the
propellant gas escapes through a long tube (the dip tube) that
extends from the bottom of the can. With the valve open, the
propellant, at a greater pressure than the atmosphere, escapes
through the dip tube, carrying the active ingredient(s) with it.
The rapidly expanding gas propels the contents from the can
and in some instances (for example, shaving cream, carpet
shampoo) produces a foam. After each use, the remaining propellant in the can reestablishes equilibrium between the liquid and gaseous phases, keeping the pressure constant within
the can as long as sufﬁcient propellant remains. The trick is
to have the active and inactive ingredients and the propellant
run out at the same time. Given the nature of the most common propellants, you can understand the warning about not
putting the “empty” cans in a ﬁre.

501

Propellant
vapor

Liquid
propellant

Aqueous
solution
containing
ingredients to
be delivered

An aerosol can for delivery of an active ingredient
dissolved in an aqueous solution.

Now we can use Raoult’s law to predict the vapor pressure:
Psoln  xH2OPH0 2O  10.9292123.76 torr2  22.1 torr
See Exercise 11.48.

Nonideal Solutions
So far we have assumed that the solute is nonvolatile and so does not contribute to the
vapor pressure over the solution. However, for liquid–liquid solutions where both components are volatile, a modiﬁed form of Raoult’s law applies:
PTOTAL  PA  PB  xAP0A  xBP0B
where PTOTAL represents the total vapor pressure of a solution containing A and B, xA and
xB are the mole fractions of A and B, P 0A and P 0B are the vapor pressures of pure A and
pure B, and PA and PB are the partial pressures resulting from molecules of A and of B
in the vapor above the solution (see Fig. 11.12).
FIGURE 11.12
When a solution contains two volatile components, both contribute to the total vapor pressure. Note that
in this case the solution contains equal numbers of the components
and
but the vapor contains
more
than . This means that component
is more volatile (has a higher vapor pressure as a
pure liquid) than component .

502

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions
A liquid–liquid solution that obeys Raoult’s law is called an ideal solution. Raoult’s
law is to solutions what the ideal gas law is to gases. As with gases, ideal behavior for
solutions is never perfectly achieved but is sometimes closely approached. Nearly ideal
behavior is often observed when the solute–solute, solvent–solvent, and solute–solvent
interactions are very similar. That is, in solutions where the solute and solvent are very
much alike, the solute simply acts to dilute the solvent. However, if the solvent has a special afﬁnity for the solute, such as if hydrogen bonding occurs, the tendency of the solvent
molecules to escape will be lowered more than expected. The observed vapor pressure
will be lower than the value predicted by Raoult’s law; there will be a negative deviation
from Raoult’s law.
When a solute and solvent release large quantities of energy in the formation of a
solution, that is, when Hsoln is large and negative, we can assume that strong interactions
exist between the solute and solvent. In this case we expect a negative deviation from
Raoult’s law, because both components will have a lower escaping tendency in the solution than in the pure liquids. This behavior is illustrated by an acetone–water solution,
where the molecules can hydrogen-bond effectively:
CH3

Strong solute–solvent interaction gives a
vapor pressure lower than that predicted
by Raoult’s law.

CH3

G
D
C PO , HO O
D

H

  

In contrast, if two liquids mix endothermically, it indicates that the solute–solvent
interactions are weaker than the interactions among the molecules in the pure liquids.
More energy is required to expand the liquids than is released when the liquids are mixed.
In this case the molecules in the solution have a higher tendency to escape than expected,
and positive deviations from Raoult’s law are observed (see Fig. 11.13). An example of
this case is provided by a solution of ethanol and hexane, whose Lewis structures are as
follows:
H H
A A
OOH
HOCO COO
Q
A A
H H

H H H H H H
A A A A A A
HO CO COCO CO CO COH
A A A A A A
H H H H H H

Ethanol

Hexane

Vapor pressure
of solution

Vapor pressure

Vapor pressure of pure B

Vapor pressure
of solution

Vapor pressure
Vap
or p
of pure A
r
essu
rti
re o
al
f so
pr
lutio
es
n
su
re
B

Pa

re A

ssu

re
al p

ti

Par

χA
χB
(a)

χA
χB
(b)

χA
χB
(c)

FIGURE 11.13
Vapor pressure for a solution of two volatile liquids. (a) The behavior predicted for an ideal liquid–liquid solution by Raoult’s law. (b) A
solution for which PTOTAL is larger than the value calculated from Raoult’s law. This solution shows a positive deviation from Raoult’s law. (c) A
solution for which PTOTAL is smaller than the value calculated from Raoult’s law. This solution shows a negative deviation from Raoult’s law.

11.4 The Vapor Pressures of Solutions

TABLE 11.4

503

Summary of the Behavior of Various Types of Solutions

Interactive
Forces Between
Solute (A)
and Solvent (B)
Particles

T for
Solution
Formation

Hsoln

Deviation from
Raoult’s Law

A ↔ A, B ↔ B q A ↔ B

Zero

Zero

A ↔ A, B ↔ B  A ↔ B

Negative
(exothermic)
Positive
(endothermic)

Positive

None (ideal
solution)
Negative

Negative

Positive

A ↔ A, B ↔ B  A ↔ B

CH3

Benzene

Toluene

Sample Exercise 11.7

Example
Benzene–
toluene
Acetone–
water
Ethanol–
hexane

The polar ethanol and the nonpolar hexane molecules are not able to interact
effectively. Thus the enthalpy of solution is positive, as is the deviation from Raoult’s
law.
Finally, for a solution of very similar liquids, such as benzene and toluene (shown in
margin), the enthalpy of solution is very close to zero, and thus the solution closely obeys
Raoult’s law (ideal behavior).
A summary of the behavior of various types of solutions is given in Table 11.4.

Calculating the Vapor Pressure of a Solution Containing
Two Liquids
A solution is prepared by mixing 5.81 g acetone (C3H6O, molar mass  58.1 g/mol) and
11.9 g chloroform (HCCl3, molar mass  119.4 g/mol). At 35°C, this solution has a total
vapor pressure of 260. torr. Is this an ideal solution? The vapor pressures of pure acetone
and pure chloroform at 35°C are 345 and 293 torr, respectively.
Solution

Acetone

To decide whether this solution behaves ideally, we ﬁrst calculate the expected vapor pressure using Raoult’s law:
PTOTAL  xAP0A  xCP0C

Chloroform

where A stands for acetone and C stands for chloroform. The calculated value can then
be compared with the observed vapor pressure.
First, we must calculate the number of moles of acetone and chloroform:
5.81 g acetone 
11.9 g chloroform 

1 mol acetone
 0.100 mol acetone
58.1 g acetone

1 mol chloroform
 0.100 mol chloroform
119 g chloroform

Since the solution contains equal numbers of moles of acetone and chloroform, that is,
x  0.500
A

and xC  0.500

the expected vapor pressure is
PTOTAL  10.50021345 torr2  10.50021293 torr2  319 torr

504

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

In this case the usually nonpolar COH
bond is strongly polarized by the three
attached, highly electronegative chlorine
atoms, thus producing hydrogen bonding.

Comparing this value with the observed pressure of 260. torr shows that the solution does
not behave ideally. The observed value is lower than that expected. This negative deviation from Raoult’s law can be explained in terms of the hydrogen bonding interaction
CH3

Cl
D
G
CPO, HOC O Cl
G
D
Cl


CH3
Acetone

Chloroform

which lowers the tendency of these molecules to escape from the solution.
See Exercises 11.55 and 11.56.

11.5

Boiling-Point Elevation and Freezing-Point
Depression

In the preceding section we saw how a solute affects the vapor pressure of a liquid solvent. Because changes of state depend on vapor pressure, the presence of a solute also affects the freezing point and boiling point of a solvent. Freezing-point depression, boilingpoint elevation, and osmotic pressure (discussed in Section 11.6) are called colligative
properties. As we will see, they are grouped together because they depend only on the
number, and not on the identity, of the solute particles in an ideal solution. Because of
their direct relationship to the number of solute particles, the colligative properties are
very useful for characterizing the nature of a solute after it is dissolved in a solvent and
for determining molar masses of substances.
Normal boiling point was deﬁned in
Section 10.8.
Visualization: Boiling-Point
Elevation: Liquid/Vapor
Equilibrium
Visualization: Boiling-Point
Elevation: Addition of a Solute
Visualization: Boiling-Point
Elevation: Solution/Vapor
Equilibrium

Boiling-Point Elevation
The normal boiling point of a liquid occurs at the temperature where the vapor pressure is equal to 1 atmosphere. We have seen that a nonvolatile solute lowers the vapor
pressure of the solvent. Therefore, such a solution must be heated to a higher temperature than the boiling point of the pure solvent to reach a vapor pressure of 1 atmosphere. This means that a nonvolatile solute elevates the boiling point of the solvent.
Figure 11.14 shows the phase diagram for an aqueous solution containing a nonvolatile
solute. Note that the liquid/vapor line is shifted to higher temperatures than those for
pure water.

1 atm

FIGURE 11.14
Phase diagrams for pure water (red lines)
and for an aqueous solution containing a
nonvolatile solute (blue lines). Note that
the boiling point of the solution is higher
than that of pure water. Conversely, the
freezing point of the solution is lower than
that of pure water. The effect of a nonvolatile solute is to extend the liquid range
of a solvent.

Pressure (atm)

Vapor pressure
of pure water

Vapor pressure
of solution
Freezing point
of water
Boiling point

Freezing
point of
solution

Boiling point
of solution

of water
∆Tb

∆Tf
Temperature (°C)

505

11.5 Boiling-Point Elevation and Freezing-Point Depression

TABLE 11.5 Molal Boiling-Point Elevation Constants (Kb) and Freezing-Point
Depression Constants (Kf) for Several Solvents

Solvent
Water (H2O)
Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)
Chloroform (CHCl3)
Benzene (C6H6)
Carbon disulﬁde (CS2)
Ethyl ether (C4H10O)
Camphor (C10H16O)

Boiling
Point
(⬚C)

Kb
(⬚C  kg/mol)

Freezing
Point
(⬚C)

Kf
(⬚C  kg/mol)

100.0
76.5
61.2
80.1
46.2
34.5
208.0

0.51
5.03
3.63
2.53
2.34
2.02
5.95

0
22.99
63.5
5.5
111.5
116.2
179.8

1.86
30.
4.70
5.12
3.83
1.79
40.

As you might expect, the magnitude of the boiling-point elevation depends on the concentration of the solute. The change in boiling point can be represented by the equation
¢T  Kbmsolute
where ¢T is the boiling-point elevation, or the difference between the boiling point of the
solution and that of the pure solvent, Kb is a constant that is characteristic of the solvent
and is called the molal boiling-point elevation constant, and msolute is the molality of the
solute in the solution.
Values of Kb for some common solvents are given in Table 11.5. The molar mass of
a solute can be determined from the observed boiling-point elevation, as shown in Sample Exercise 11.8.
Sample Exercise 11.8

Calculating the Molar Mass by Boiling-Point Elevation
A solution was prepared by dissolving 18.00 g glucose in 150.0 g water. The resulting
solution was found to have a boiling point of 100.34°C. Calculate the molar mass of
glucose. Glucose is a molecular solid that is present as individual molecules in solution.
Solution
We make use of the equation
where

¢T  Kbmsolute
¢T  100.34°C  100.00°C  0.34°C

From Table 11.5, for water Kb  0.51. The molality of this solution then can be calculated by rearranging the boiling-point elevation equation to give
msolute 

¢T
0.34°C

 0.67 mol/kg
Kb
0.51°C  kg/mol

The solution was prepared using 0.1500 kg water. Using the deﬁnition of molality, we can
ﬁnd the number of moles of glucose in the solution.
nglucose
mol solute

kg solvent
0.1500 kg
 10.67 mol/kg210.1500 kg2  0.10 mol

msolute  0.67 mol/kg 
nglucose
Sugar dissolved in water to make candy
causes the boiling point to be elevated
above 100ºC.

Thus 0.10 mol glucose has a mass of 18.00 g, and 1.0 mol glucose has a mass of 180 g
(10  18.00 g). The molar mass of glucose is 180 g/mol.
See Exercise 11.58.

506

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

Melting point and freezing point both refer to the temperature where the solid
and liquid coexist.

(a)

FIGURE 11.15
(a) Ice in equilibrium with liquid water.
(b) Ice in equilibrium with liquid water containing a dissolved solute (shown in pink).

(b)

Freezing-Point Depression

Visualization: Freezing-Point
Depression: Solid/Liquid
Equilibrium
Visualization: Freezing-Point
Depression: Addition of a
Solute
Visualization: Freezing-Point
Depression: Solid/Solution
Equilibrium

When a solute is dissolved in a solvent, the freezing point of the solution is lower than
that of the pure solvent. Why? Recall that the vapor pressures of ice and liquid water are
the same at 0°C. Suppose a solute is dissolved in water. The resulting solution will not
freeze at 0°C because the water in the solution has a lower vapor pressure than that of
pure ice. No ice will form under these conditions. However, the vapor pressure of ice decreases more rapidly than that of liquid water as the temperature decreases. Therefore, as
the solution is cooled, the vapor pressure of the ice and that of the liquid water in the solution will eventually become equal. The temperature at which this occurs is the new freezing point of the solution and is below 0°C. The freezing point has been depressed.
We can account for this behavior in terms of the simple model shown in Fig. 11.15.
The presence of the solute lowers the rate at which molecules in the liquid return to the
solid state. Thus, for an aqueous solution, only the liquid state is found at 0°C. As the solution is cooled, the rate at which water molecules leave the solid ice decreases until this
rate and the rate of formation of ice become equal and equilibrium is reached. This is the
freezing point of the water in the solution.
Because a solute lowers the freezing point of water, compounds such as sodium chloride and calcium chloride are often spread on streets and sidewalks to prevent ice from
forming in freezing weather. Of course, if the outside temperature is lower than the freezing point of the resulting salt solution, ice forms anyway. So this procedure is not effective at extremely cold temperatures.
The solid/liquid line for an aqueous solution is shown on the phase diagram for water in Fig. 11.14. Since the presence of a solute elevates the boiling point and depresses
the freezing point of the solvent, adding a solute has the effect of extending the liquid range.
The equation for freezing-point depression is analogous to that for boiling-point elevation:
¢T  Kf msolute

Spreading salt on a highway.

Sample Exercise 11.9

where ¢T is the freezing-point depression, or the difference between the freezing point
of the pure solvent and that of the solution, and Kf is a constant that is characteristic of a
particular solvent and is called the molal freezing-point depression constant. Values of
Kf for common solvents are listed in Table 11.5.
Like the boiling-point elevation, the observed freezing-point depression can be used
to determine molar masses and to characterize solutions.

Freezing-Point Depression
What mass of ethylene glycol (C2H6O2, molar mass  62.1 g/mol), the main component
of antifreeze, must be added to 10.0 L of water to produce a solution for use in a car’s
radiator that freezes at 10.0°F (23.3°C)? Assume the density of water is exactly
1 g/mL.

Ethylene glycol

11.5 Boiling-Point Elevation and Freezing-Point Depression

507

Solution
The freezing point must be lowered from 0°C to 23.3°C. To determine the molality of
ethylene glycol needed to accomplish this, we can use the equation
¢T  Kf msolute
where ¢T  23.3°C and Kf  1.86 (from Table 11.5). Solving for the molality gives
msolute 

¢T
23.3°C

 12.5 mol/kg
Kf
1.86°C  kg/mol

This means that 12.5 mol ethylene glycol must be added per kilogram of water. We have
10.0 L, or 10.0 kg, of water. Therefore, the total number of moles of ethylene glycol
needed is

The addition of antifreeze lowers the
freezing point of water in a car’s radiator.

12.5 mol
 10.0 kg  1.25  102 mol
kg
The mass of ethylene glycol needed is
1.25  102 mol 

62.1 g
 7.76  103 g 1or 7.76 kg2
mol
See Exercises 11.61 and 11.62.

Sample Exercise 11.10

Determining Molar Mass by Freezing-Point Depression
A chemist is trying to identify a human hormone that controls metabolism by determining its molar mass. A sample weighing 0.546 g was dissolved in 15.0 g benzene, and the
freezing-point depression was determined to be 0.240°C. Calculate the molar mass of the
hormone.
Solution
From Table 11.5, Kf for benzene is 5.12°C  kg/mol, so the molality of the hormone is
mhormone 

¢T
0.240°C

 4.69  102 mol/kg
Kf
5.12°C  kg/mol

The moles of hormone can be obtained from the deﬁnition of molality:
4.69  102 mol/kg  msolute 

mol hormone
0.0150 kg benzene

or
mol hormone  a4.69  102

mol
b 10.0150 kg2  7.04  104 mol
kg

Since 0.546 g hormone was dissolved, 7.04  104 mol hormone has a mass of 0.546 g,
and
xg
0.546 g

4
1.00 mol
7.04  10 mol
x  776 g/mol
Thus the molar mass of the hormone is 776 g/mol.
See Exercises 11.63 and 11.64.

508

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

11.6
Visualization: Osmosis

Solution
Membrane
Pure solvent
Time

Osmotic Pressure

Osmotic pressure, another of the colligative properties, can be understood from Fig. 11.16.
A solution and pure solvent are separated by a semipermeable membrane, which allows
solvent but not solute molecules to pass through. As time passes, the volume of the solution increases and that of the solvent decreases. This ﬂow of solvent into the solution
through the semipermeable membrane is called osmosis. Eventually the liquid levels stop
changing, indicating that the system has reached equilibrium. Because the liquid levels
are different at this point, there is a greater hydrostatic pressure on the solution than on
the pure solvent. This excess pressure is called the osmotic pressure.
We can take another view of this phenomenon, as illustrated in Fig. 11.17. Osmosis can
be prevented by applying a pressure to the solution. The minimum pressure that stops the
osmosis is equal to the osmotic pressure of the solution. A simple model to explain osmotic
pressure can be constructed as shown in Fig. 11.18. The membrane allows only solvent molecules to pass through. However, the initial rates of solvent transfer to and from the solution are not the same. The solute particles interfere with the passage of solvent, so the rate
of transfer is slower from the solution to the solvent than in the reverse direction. Thus there
is a net transfer of solvent molecules into the solution, which causes the solution volume to
increase. As the solution level rises in the tube, the resulting pressure exerts an extra “push”
on the solvent molecules in the solution, forcing them back through the membrane. Eventually, enough pressure develops so that the solvent transfer becomes equal in both directions. At this point, equilibrium is achieved and the levels stop changing.
Osmotic pressure can be used to characterize solutions and determine molar masses,
as can the other colligative properties, but osmotic pressure is particularly useful because
a small concentration of solute produces a relatively large osmotic pressure.
Experiments show that the dependence of the osmotic pressure on solution concentration is represented by the equation
ß  MRT

Time

Net
movement
of solvent

where ß is the osmotic pressure in atmospheres, M is the molarity of the solution, R is
the gas law constant, and T is the Kelvin temperature.
A molar mass determination using osmotic pressure is illustrated in Sample Exercise
11.11.

Applied pressure,
needed to stop
osmosis

Osmotic
pressure

(at equilibrium)

FIGURE 11.16
A tube with a bulb on the end that is covered by a semipermeable membrane. The
solution is inside the tube and is bathed in
the pure solvent. There is a net transfer of
solvent molecules into the solution until
the hydrostatic pressure equalizes the solvent ﬂow in both directions.

Pure solvent

Solution
Semipermeable
membrane

FIGURE 11.17
The normal ﬂow of solvent into the
solution (osmosis) can be prevented by
applying an external pressure to the
solution. The minimum pressure required
to stop the osmosis is equal to the osmotic
pressure of the solution.

11.6 Osmotic Pressure

509

Osmotic
pressure

FIGURE 11.18
(a) A pure solvent and its solution (containing a nonvolatile solute) are separated by a
semipermeable membrane through which
solvent molecules (blue) can pass but solute
molecules (green) cannot. The rate of solvent transfer is greater from solvent to solution than from solution to solvent. (b) The
system at equilibrium, where the rate of
solvent transfer is the same in both
directions.

Sample Exercise 11.11

Pure solvent

Solution

Pure solvent

Solution
Semipermeable
membrane

Semipermeable
membrane
(a)

(b)

Determining Molar Mass from Osmotic Pressure
To determine the molar mass of a certain protein, 1.00  103 g of it was dissolved in
enough water to make 1.00 mL of solution. The osmotic pressure of this solution was
found to be 1.12 torr at 25.0°C. Calculate the molar mass of the protein.
Solution
We use the equation
ß  MRT
In this case we have
ß  1.12 torr 

1 atm
 1.47  103 atm
760 torr

R  0.08206 L  atm/K  mol
T  25.0  273  298 K
Note that the osmotic pressure must be converted to atmospheres because of the units
of R.
Solving for M gives
M

1.47  103 atm
 6.01  105 mol/L
10.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2

Since 1.00  103 g protein was dissolved in 1 mL solution, the mass of protein per liter
of solution is 1.00 g. The solution’s concentration is 6.01  105 mol/L. This concentration
is produced from 1.00  103 g protein per milliliter, or 1.00 g/L. Thus 6.01  105 mol
protein has a mass of 1.00 g and
1.00 g
5

6.01  10
Measurements of osmotic pressure generally give much more accurate molar
mass values than those from freezingpoint or boiling-point changes.

xg
1.00 mol
mol
x  1.66  104 g


The molar mass of the protein is 1.66  104 g/mol. This molar mass may seem very large,
but it is relatively small for a protein.
See Exercise 11.66.
In osmosis, a semipermeable membrane prevents transfer of all solute particles. A
similar phenomenon, called dialysis, occurs at the walls of most plant and animal cells.

510

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

Impure
blood in

Purified
blood out
Essential ions and
molecules remain
in blood
Dialyzing
solution

Waste products dialyze out
into the washing solution

FIGURE 11.19
Representation of the functioning of an
artiﬁcial kidney.
Patient undergoing dialysis.

The brine used in pickling causes the
cucumbers to shrivel.

Sample Exercise 11.12

However, in this case the membrane allows transfer of both solvent molecules and small
solute molecules and ions. One of the most important applications of dialysis is the use
of artiﬁcial kidney machines to purify the blood. The blood is passed through a cellophane
tube, which acts as the semipermeable membrane. The tube is immersed in a dialyzing
solution (see Fig. 11.19). This “washing” solution contains the same concentrations of
ions and small molecules as blood but has none of the waste products normally removed
by the kidneys. The resulting dialysis (movement of waste molecules into the washing solution) cleanses the blood.
Solutions that have identical osmotic pressures are said to be isotonic solutions. Fluids administered intravenously must be isotonic with body ﬂuids. For example, if red blood
cells are bathed in a hypertonic solution, which is a solution having an osmotic pressure
higher than that of the cell ﬂuids, the cells will shrivel because of a net transfer of water
out of the cells. This phenomenon is called crenation. The opposite phenomenon, called
hemolysis, occurs when cells are bathed in a hypotonic solution, a solution with an osmotic pressure lower than that of the cell ﬂuids. In this case, the cells rupture because of
the ﬂow of water into the cells.
We can use the phenomenon of crenation to our advantage. Food can be preserved
by treating its surface with a solute that gives a solution that is hypertonic to bacteria cells.
Bacteria on the food then tend to shrivel and die. This is why salt can be used to protect
meat and sugar can be used to protect fruit.

Isotonic Solutions
What concentration of sodium chloride in water is needed to produce an aqueous solution isotonic with blood ( ß  7.70 atm at 25°C2 ?
Solution
We can calculate the molarity of the solute from the equation
ß  MRT
M

or

M

ß
RT

7.70 atm
 0.315 mol/L
10.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2

11.6 Osmotic Pressure

511

Red blood cells in three stages of osmosis. (a) The normal shape of a red blood cell. (b) This cell has shrunk because water moved out of it by osmosis.
(c) This cell is swollen with water that has moved into it by osmosis.

This represents the total molarity of solute particles. But NaCl gives two ions per formula
0.315 M
unit. Therefore, the concentration of NaCl needed is
 0.1575 M  0.158 M.
2
That is,
NaCl ¡ Na   Cl 
0.1575 M

0.1575 M

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

0.1575 M

0.315 M

See Exercise 11.68.

Reverse Osmosis

Pressure greater
than πsoln

Pure solvent

Solution
Semipermeable
membrane

FIGURE 11.20
Reverse osmosis. A pressure greater than
the osmotic pressure of the solution is applied, which causes a net ﬂow of solvent
molecules (blue) from the solution to the
pure solvent. The solute molecules (green)
remain behind.

If a solution in contact with pure solvent across a semipermeable membrane is subjected to
an external pressure larger than its osmotic pressure, reverse osmosis occurs. The pressure
will cause a net ﬂow of solvent from the solution to the solvent, as shown in Fig. 11.20.
In reverse osmosis, the semipermeable membrane acts as a “molecular ﬁlter” to remove
solute particles. This fact is applicable to the desalination (removal of dissolved salts) of
seawater, which is highly hypertonic to body ﬂuids and thus is not drinkable.
As the population of the Sun Belt areas of the United States increases, more demand
will be placed on the limited supplies of fresh water there. One obvious source of fresh
water is from the desalination of seawater. Various schemes have been suggested, including solar evaporation, reverse osmosis, and even a plan for towing icebergs from Antarctica. The problem, of course, is that all the available processes are expensive. However,
as water shortages increase, desalination is becoming necessary. For example, the ﬁrst
full-time public desalination plant in the United States started operations on Catalina
Island, just off the coast of California (see Fig. 11.21). This plant, which can produce
132,000 gallons of drinkable water from the Paciﬁc Ocean every day, operates by reverse
osmosis. Powerful pumps, developing over 800 lb/in2 of pressure, are employed to force
seawater through synthetic semipermeable membranes.
Catalina Island’s plant may be just the beginning. The city of Santa Barbara opened
a $40 million desalination plant in 1992 that can produce 8 million gallons of drinking
water per day, and other plants are in the planning stages.
A small-scale, manually operated reverse osmosis desalinator has been developed by
the U.S. Navy to provide fresh water on life rafts. Potable water can be supplied by this
desalinator at the rate of 1.25 gallons of water per hour—enough to keep 25 people alive.
This compact desalinator, which weighs only 10 pounds, can now replace the bulky cases
of fresh water formerly stored in Navy life rafts.

512

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

1. Salt water pumped from
underground wells.

5. Brine is
pumped
into ocean.

2. Salt water is forced through 20-micron
and 5-micron filters at a pressure of
800 pounds per square inch.

3. Fresh water is forced through
additional filters.

(b)
4. Fresh water is pumped
into water supply.

(a)
FIGURE 11.21
(a) Residents of Catalina Island off the coast of southern California are beneﬁting from a new desalination plant that can supply 132,000 gallons a day,
or one-third of the island’s daily needs. (b) Machinery in the desalination plant for Catalina Island.

11.7

Colligative Properties of Electrolyte Solutions

As we have seen previously, the colligative properties of solutions depend on the total
concentration of solute particles. For example, a 0.10 m glucose solution shows a freezing
point depression of 0.186°C:
¢T  Kf m  11.86°C  kg/mol210.100 mol/kg2  0.186°C
Dutch chemist J. H. van’t Hoff
(1852–1911) received the ﬁrst Nobel
Prize in chemistry in 1901.

On the other hand, a 0.10 m sodium chloride solution should show a freezing-point
depression of 0.37°C, since the solution is 0.10 m Na ions and 0.10 m Cl ions. Therefore, the solution contains a total of 0.20 m solute particles, and T  (1.86C  kg/mol)
(0.20 mol/kg)  0.37C.
The relationship between the moles of solute dissolved and the moles of particles in
solution is usually expressed using the van’t Hoff factor, i:
i

Ion pair

– +

–
+
+
–

+
–
–

+
+ –

Ion pair

FIGURE 11.22
In an aqueous solution a few ions aggregate, forming ion pairs that behave as a
unit.

moles of particles in solution
moles of solute dissolved

The expected value for i can be calculated for a salt by noting the number of ions per
formula unit. For example, for NaCl, i is 2; for K2SO4, i is 3; and for Fe3(PO4)2, i is 5.
These calculated values assume that when a salt dissolves, it completely dissociates into
its component ions, which then move around independently. This assumption is not always true. For example, the freezing-point depression observed for 0.10 m NaCl is 1.87
times that for 0.10 m glucose rather than twice as great. That is, for a 0.10 m NaCl solution the observed value for i is 1.87 rather than 2. Why? The best explanation is that ion
pairing occurs in solution (see Fig. 11.22). At a given instant a small percentage of the
sodium and chloride ions are paired and thus count as a single particle. In general, ion
pairing is most important in concentrated solutions. As the solution becomes more dilute,

11.7 Colligative Properties of Electrolyte Solutions

513

TABLE 11.6 Expected and Observed Values of
the van’t Hoff Factor for 0.05 m Solutions of
Several Electrolytes
Electrolyte

i (expected)

i (observed)

2.0
3.0
2.0
4.0
2.0
1.0

1.9
2.7
1.3
3.4
1.9
1.0

aCl
MgCl2
MgSO4
FeCl3
HCl
Glucose*

*A nonelectrolyte shown for comparison.

the ions are farther apart and less ion pairing occurs. For example, in a 0.0010 m NaCl
solution, the observed value of i is 1.97, which is very close to the expected value.
Ion pairing occurs to some extent in all electrolyte solutions. Table 11.6 shows expected and observed values of i for a given concentration of various electrolytes. Note
that the deviation of i from the expected value tends to be greatest where the ions have
multiple charges. This is expected because ion pairing ought to be most important for
highly charged ions.
The colligative properties of electrolyte solutions are described by including the van’t
Hoff factor in the appropriate equation. For example, for changes in freezing and boiling
points, the modiﬁed equation is
¢T  imK
where K represents the freezing-point depression or boiling-point elevation constant for
the solvent.
For the osmotic pressure of electrolyte solutions, the equation is
ß  iMRT
Sample Exercise 11.13

Osmotic Pressure
The observed osmotic pressure for a 0.10 M solution of Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2 at 25°C is 10.8
atm. Compare the expected and experimental values for i.
Solution
The ionic solid Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2 dissociates in water to produce 5 ions:
Fe1NH4 2 2 1SO4 2 2 ¡ Fe2  24  2SO42
H2 O

Thus the expected value for i is 5. We can obtain the experimental value for i by using
the equation for osmotic pressure:
ß  iMRT

or

i

ß
MRT

where   10.8 atm, M  0.10 mol/L, R  0.08206 L  atm/K  mol, and T  25  273 
298 K. Substituting these values into the equation gives
i

10.8 atm
ß

 4.4
MRT
10.10 mol/L210.08206 L  atm/K  mol21298 K2

The experimental value for i is less than the expected value, presumably because of ion
pairing.
See Exercises 11.73 and 11.74.

514

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Drink of Champions—Water
n1965, the University of Florida football team, the Gators,
participated in a research program to test a sports drink
formula containing a mixture of carbohydrates and electrolytes. The drink was used to help prevent dehydration
caused by extreme workouts in the hot Florida climate. The
Gators’ success that season was in part attributed to their use
of the sports drink formula. In 1967, a modiﬁed form of this
formula was marketed with the name Gatorade. Today,
Gatorade leads sales in sports drinks, but many other brands
have entered a market where annual sales exceed $700
million!
During moderate- to high-intensity exercise, glycogen
(a fuel reserve that helps maintain normal body processes)
can be depleted within 60 to 90 minutes. Blood sugar levels drop as the glycogen reserves are used up, and lactic acid
(a by-product of glucose metabolism) builds up in muscle

I

11.8

FIGURE 11.23
The Tyndall effect.

–
–
+
+ –
+
–
+
+
– +
+ –
+
–
–

–
–
+
+ –
+
–
+
+
– +
+ –
+
–
–

FIGURE 11.24
A representation of two colloidal particles.
In each the center particle is surrounded by
a layer of positive ions, with negative ions
in the outer layer. Thus, although the particles are electrically neutral, they still repel
each other because of their outer negative
layer of ions.

tissue causing fatigue and muscle cramps. Muscles also
generate a large amount of heat that must be dissipated. Water, which has a large speciﬁc heat capacity, is used to take
heat away from these muscles. Sweating and evaporative
cooling help the body maintain a constant temperature, but
at a huge cost. During a high-intensity workout in hot
weather, anywhere from 1 to 3 quarts of water can be lost
from sweating per hour. Sweating away more than 2% of
your body weight—a quart for every 100 pounds—can put
a large stress on the heart, increasing body temperature and
decreasing performance. Excessive sweating also results in
the loss of sodium and potassium ions—two very important
electrolytes that are present in the ﬂuids inside and outside
cells.
All the major sports drinks contain three main ingredients—carbohydrates in the form of simple sugars such as

Colloids

Mud can be suspended in water by vigorous stirring. When the stirring stops, most of
the particles rapidly settle out, but even after several days some of the smallest particles remain suspended. Although undetected in normal lighting, their presence can be
demonstrated by shining a beam of intense light through the suspension. The beam is
visible from the side because the light is scattered by the suspended particles (Fig.
11.23). In a true solution, on the other hand, the beam is invisible from the side because
the individual ions and molecules dispersed in the solution are too small to scatter visible
light.
The scattering of light by particles is called the Tyndall effect and is often used to
distinguish between a suspension and a true solution.
A suspension of tiny particles in some medium is called a colloidal dispersion, or a
colloid. The suspended particles are single large molecules or aggregates of molecules or
ions ranging in size from 1 to 1000 nm. Colloids are classiﬁed according to the states of
the dispersed phase and the dispersing medium. Table 11.7 summarizes various types of
colloids.
What stabilizes a colloid? Why do the particles remain suspended rather than forming larger aggregates and precipitating out? The answer is complicated, but the main factor seems to be electrostatic repulsion. A colloid, like all other macroscopic substances,
is electrically neutral. However, when a colloid is placed in an electric ﬁeld, the dispersed
particles all migrate to the same electrode and thus must all have the same charge. How
is this possible? The center of a colloidal particle (a tiny ionic crystal, a group of molecules, or a single large molecule) attracts from the medium a layer of ions, all of the same
charge. This group of ions, in turn, attracts another layer of oppositely charged ions, as
shown in Fig. 11.24. Because the colloidal particles all have an outer layer of ions with
the same charge, they repel each other and do not easily aggregate to form particles that
are large enough to precipitate.

11.8 Colloids

sucrose, glucose, and fructose; electrolytes, including sodium
and potassium ions; and water. Because these are the three
major substances lost through sweating, good scientiﬁc
reasoning suggests that drinking sports drinks should
improve performance. But just how effectively do sports
drinks deliver on their promises?
Recent studies have conﬁrmed that athletes who eat a
balanced diet and drink plenty of water are just as well off
as those who consume sports drinks. A sports drink may
have only one advantage over drinking water—it tastes better than water to most athletes. And if a drink tastes better,
it will encourage more consumption, thus keeping cells
hydrated.
Since most of the leading sports drinks contain the same
ingredients in similar concentrations, taste may be the single most important factor in choosing your drink. If you are
not interested in any particular sports drink, drink plenty of
water. The key to quality performance is to keep your cells
hydrated.

TABLE 11.7
High DC
voltage
Soot-free
gases escape

Plate
electrodes
Point
electrodes

Soot-laden
smoke

Ground

Soot particles
removed here

FIGURE 11.25
The Cottrell precipitator installed in a
smokestack. The charged plates attract the
colloidal particles because of their ion layers and thus remove them from the smoke.

515

For healthy athletes, drinking water during exercise may be
as effective as drinking sports drinks.

Adapted with permission from “Sports Drinks: Don’t Sweat the
Small Stuff,” by Tim Graham, ChemMatters, February 1999, p. 11.

Types of Colloids

Examples

Dispersing
Medium

Dispersed
Substance

Colloid Type

Fog, aerosol sprays
Smoke, airborne bacteria
Whipped cream, soap suds
Milk, mayonnaise
Paint, clays, gelatin
Marshmallow, polystyrene foam
Butter, cheese
Ruby glass

Gas
Gas
Liquid
Liquid
Liquid
Solid
Solid
Solid

Liquid
Solid
Gas
Liquid
Solid
Gas
Liquid
Solid

Aerosol
Aerosol
Foam
Emulsion
Sol
Solid foam
Solid emulsion
Solid sol

The destruction of a colloid, called coagulation, usually can be accomplished either
by heating or by adding an electrolyte. Heating increases the velocities of the colloidal
particles, causing them to collide with enough energy that the ion barriers are penetrated and the particles can aggregate. Because this process is repeated many times,
the particle grows to a point where it settles out. Adding an electrolyte neutralizes
the adsorbed ion layers. This is why clay suspended in rivers is deposited where the
river reaches the ocean, forming the deltas characteristic of large rivers like the
Mississippi. The high salt content of the seawater causes the colloidal clay particles to
coagulate.
The removal of soot from smoke is another example of the coagulation of a colloid.
When smoke is passed through an electrostatic precipitator (Fig. 11.25), the suspended
solids are removed. The use of precipitators has produced an immense improvement in
the air quality of heavily industrialized cities.

516

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Organisms and Ice Formation
he ice-cold waters of the polar oceans are teeming with
ﬁsh that seem immune to freezing. One might think that
these ﬁsh have some kind of antifreeze in their blood. However, studies show that they are protected from freezing in
a very different way from the way antifreeze protects our
cars. As we have seen in this chapter, solutes such as sugar,
salt, and ethylene glycol lower the temperature at which the
solid and liquid phases of water can coexist. However, the
ﬁsh could not tolerate high concentrations of solutes in their
blood because of the osmotic pressure effects. Instead, they
are protected by proteins in their blood. These proteins allow the water in the bloodstream to be supercooled—exist
below 0°C—without forming ice. They apparently coat the
surface of each tiny ice crystal, as soon as it begins to form,
preventing it from growing to a size that would cause biologic damage.
Although it might at ﬁrst seem surprising, this research
on polar ﬁsh has attracted the attention of ice cream manufacturers. Premium quality ice cream is smooth; it does not
have large ice crystals in it. The makers of ice cream would
like to incorporate these polar ﬁsh proteins, or molecules
that behave similarly, into ice cream to prevent the growth
of ice crystals during storage.
Fruit and vegetable growers have a similar interest:
They also want to prevent ice formation that damages their
crops during an unusual cold wave. However, this is a very
different kind of problem than keeping polar ﬁsh from freezing. Many types of fruits and vegetables are colonized by

T

Key Terms

An Antarctic ﬁsh, Chaerophalus aceratus.

bacteria that manufacture a protein that encourages freezing
by acting as a nucleating agent to start an ice crystal.
Chemists have identiﬁed the offending protein in the bacteria and the gene that is responsible for making it. They have
learned to modify the genetic material of these bacteria in a
way that removes their ability to make the protein that encourages ice crystal formation. If testing shows that these
modiﬁed bacteria have no harmful effects on the crop or the
environment, the original bacteria strain will be replaced
with the new form so that ice crystals will not form so readily when a cold snap occurs.

For Review

Section 11.1
molarity
mass percent
mole fraction
molality
normality

Section 11.2
enthalpy (heat) of solution
enthalpy (heat) of hydration

Section 11.3
Henry’s law
thermal pollution

Section 11.4
Raoult’s law
ideal solution

Solution composition
䊉 Molarity (M): moles solute per liter of solution
䊉 Mass percent: ratio of mass of solute to mass of solution times 100%
䊉 Mole fraction (x): ratio of moles of a given component to total moles of all
components
䊉 Molality (m): moles solute per mass of solvent (in kg)
䊉 Normality (N): number of equivalents per liter of solution
Enthalpy of solution ( Hsoln)
䊉 The enthalpy change accompanying solution formation
䊉 Can be partitioned into
• The energy required to overcome the solute–solute interactions
• The energy required to “make holes” in the solvent
• The energy associated with solute–solvent interactions

For Review
Section 11.5
colligative properties
molal boiling-point elevation constant
molal freezing-point depression constant

Section 11.6
semipermeable membrane
osmosis
osmotic pressure
dialysis
isotonic solution
reverse osmosis
desalination

Section 11.7
van’t Hoff factor
ion pairing

Section 11.8
Tyndall effect
colloid (colloidal dispersion)
coagulation

517

Factors That affect solubility
䊉 Polarity of solute and solvent
• “Like dissolves like” is a useful generalization
䊉 Pressure increases the solubility of gases in a solvent
• Henry’s law: C  kP
䊉 Temperature effects
• Increased temperature decreases the solubility of a gas in water
• Most solids are more soluble at higher temperatures but important exceptions exist
Vapor pressure of solutions
䊉 A solution containing a nonvolatile solute has a lower vapor pressure than a solution of the pure solvent
䊉 Raoult’s law deﬁnes an ideal solution
solvent
x
P soln
vapor  solvent P vapor
• Solutions in which the solute–solvent attractions differ from the solute–solute
and solvent–solvent attractions violate Raoult’s law
Colligative properties
䊉 Depend on the number of solute particles present
䊉 Boiling-point elevation: ¢T  K b m solute
䊉 Freezing-point lowering: ¢T  K f m solute
䊉 Osmotic pressure: ß  MRT
• Osmosis occurs when a solution and pure solvent are separated by a semipermeable membrane that allows solvent molecules to pass but not solute particles
• Reverse osmosis occurs when the applied pressure is greater than the osmotic
pressure of the solution
䊉 Because colligative properties depend on the number of particles, solutes that
break into several ions when they dissolve have an effect proportional to the number of ions produced
• The van’t Hoff factor i represents the number of ions produced by each formula
unit of solute
Colloids
䊉 A suspension of tiny particles stabilized by electrostatic repulsion among the ion
layers surrounding the individual particles
䊉 Can be coagulated (destroyed) by heating or adding an electrolyte

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. The four most common ways to describe solution composition are mass percent,
mole fraction, molarity, and molality. Deﬁne each of these solution composition
terms. Why is molarity temperature-dependent, whereas the other three solution
composition terms are temperature-independent?
2. Using KF as an example, write equations that refer to ¢Hsoln and ¢Hhyd. Lattice
energy was deﬁned in Chapter 8 as ¢H for the reaction K(g)  F(g) ¡
KF(s). Show how you would utilize Hess’s law to calculate ¢Hsoln from ¢Hhyd
and ¢HLE for KF, where ¢HLE  lattice energy ¢Hsoln for KF, as for other soluble ionic compounds, is a relatively small number. How can this be since ¢Hhyd
and ¢HLE are relatively large negative numbers?
3. What does the axiom “like dissolves like” mean? There are four types of solute/
solvent combinations: polar solutes in polar solvents, nonpolar solutes in polar
solvents, and so on. For each type of solution, discuss the magnitude of ¢Hsoln.
4. Structure, pressure, and temperature all have an effect on solubility.
Discuss each of their effects. What is Henry’s law? Why does Henry’s law not
work for HCl(g)? What do the terms hydrophobic and hydrophilic mean?

518

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

5. Deﬁne the terms in Raoult’s law. Figure 11.9 illustrates the net transfer of water
molecules from pure water to an aqueous solution of a nonvolatile solute. Explain why eventually all of the water from the beaker of pure water will transfer
to the aqueous solution. If the experiment illustrated in Fig. 11.9 was performed
using a volatile solute, what would happen? How do you calculate the total
vapor pressure when both the solute and solvent are volatile?
6. In terms of Raoult’s law, distinguish between an ideal liquid–liquid solution and
a nonideal liquid–liquid solution. If a solution is ideal, what is true about ¢Hsoln,
¢T for the solution formation, and the interactive forces within the pure solute
and pure solvent as compared to the interactive forces within the solution. Give
an example of an ideal solution. Answer the previous two questions for solutions
that exhibit either negative or positive deviations from Raoult’s law.
7. Vapor-pressure lowering is a colligative property, as are freezing-point depression and boiling-point elevation. What is a colligative property? Why is the
freezing point depressed for a solution as compared to the pure solvent? Why is
the boiling point elevated for a solution as compared to the pure solvent?
Explain how to calculate ¢T for a freezing-point depression problem or a boilingpoint elevation problem. Of the solvents listed in Table 11.5, which would have
the largest freezing-point depression for a 0.50 molal solution? Which would
have the smallest boiling-point elevation for a 0.50 molal solution?
A common application of freezing-point depression and boiling-point
elevation experiments is to provide a means to calculate the molar mass of a
nonvolatile solute. What data are needed to calculate the molar mass of a nonvolatile solute? Explain how you would manipulate these data to calculate the
molar mass of the nonvolatile solute.
8. What is osmotic pressure? How is osmotic pressure calculated? Molarity units
are used in the osmotic pressure equation. When does the molarity of a solution
approximately equal the molality of the solution? Before refrigeration was common, many foods were preserved by salting them heavily, and many fruits were
preserved by mixing them with a large amount of sugar (fruit preserves). How
do salt and sugar act as preservatives? Two applications of osmotic pressure are
dialysis and desalination. Explain these two processes.
9. Distinguish between a strong electrolyte, a weak electrolyte, and a nonelectrolyte. How can colligative properties be used to distinguish between them?
What is the van’t Hoff factor? Why is the observed freezing-point depression for
electrolyte solutions sometimes less than the calculated value? Is the discrepancy
greater for concentrated or dilute solutions?
10. What is a colloidal dispersion? Give some examples of colloids. The Tyndall
effect is often used to distinguish between a colloidal suspension and a true
solution. Explain. The destruction of a colloid is done through a process called
coagulation. What is coagulation?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. Consider Fig. 11.9. According to the caption and picture, water
seems to go from one beaker to another.

a. Explain why this occurs.
b. The explanation in the text uses terms such as vapor pressure
and equilibrium. Explain what these have to do with the phenomenon. For example, what is coming to equilibrium?
c. Does all the water end up in the second beaker?
d. Is water evaporating from the beaker containing the solution?
If so, is the rate of evaporation increasing, decreasing, or staying constant?
Draw pictures to illustrate your explanations.

Questions

15. The two beakers in the sealed container illustrated below contain pure water and an aqueous solution of a volatile solute.

Water

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

13. Rationalize the temperature dependence of the solubility of a gas
in water in terms of the kinetic molecular theory.
14. The weak electrolyte NH3(g) does not obey Henry’s law. Why?
O2(g) obeys Henry’s law in water but not in blood (an aqueous
solution). Why?

P A0

1
Mole fraction
χB

If you have trouble with these exercises, review Sections 4.1 to 4.3 in Chapter 4.

Questions

P B0

0

Solution Review
9. Rubbing alcohol contains 585 g of isopropanol (C3H7OH) per
liter (aqueous solution). Calculate the molarity.
10. What volume of a 0.580 M solution of CaCl2 contains 1.28 g of
solute?
11. Calculate the sodium ion concentration when 70.0 mL of 3.0 M
sodium carbonate is added to 30.0 mL of 1.0 M sodium bicarbonate.
12. Write equations showing the ions present after the following
strong electrolytes are dissolved in water.
a. HNO3
d. SrBr2
g. NH4NO3
b. Na2SO4
e. KClO4
h. CuSO4
c. Al(NO3)3
f. NH4Br
i. NaOH

Aqueous
solution

If the solute is less volatile than water, explain what will happen to the volumes in the two containers as time passes.
16. The following plot shows the vapor pressure of various solutions
of components A and B at some temperature.

Vapor pressure (torr)

2. Once again, consider Fig. 11.9. Suppose instead of having a
nonvolatile solute in the solvent in one beaker, the two beakers contain different volatile liquids. That is, suppose one beaker contains
liquid A (Pvap  50 torr) and the other beaker contains liquid B
(Pvap  100 torr). Explain what happens as time passes. How is
this similar to the ﬁrst case (shown in the ﬁgure)? How is it different?
3. Assume that you place a freshwater plant into a saltwater solution and examine it under a microscope. What happens to the
plant cells? What if you placed a saltwater plant in pure water?
Explain. Draw pictures to illustrate your explanations.
4. How does ¢Hsoln relate to deviations from Raoult’s law? Explain.
5. You have read that adding a solute to a solvent can both increase
the boiling point and decrease the freezing point. A friend of
yours explains it to you like this: “The solute and solvent can be
like salt in water. The salt gets in the way of freezing in that it
blocks the water molecules from joining together. The salt acts
like a strong bond holding the water molecules together so that
it is harder to boil.” What do you say to your friend?
6. You drop an ice cube (made from pure water) into a saltwater
solution at 0°C. Explain what happens and why.
7. Using the phase diagram for water and Raoult’s law, explain
why salt is spread on the roads in winter (even when it is below
freezing).
8. You and your friend are each drinking cola from separate 2-L
bottles. Both colas are equally carbonated. You are able to drink
1 L of cola, but your friend can drink only about half a liter. You
each close the bottles and place them in the refrigerator. The next
day when you each go to get the colas, whose will be more carbonated and why?

519

17.
18.

19.

20.

Which of the following statements is false concerning solutions
of A and B?
a. The solutions exhibit negative deviations from Raoult’s law.
b. ¢Hmix for the solutions should be exothermic.
c. The intermolecular forces are stronger in solution than in either pure A or pure B.
d. Pure liquid B is more volatile than pure liquid A.
e. The solution with xB  0.6 will have a lower boiling point
than either pure A or pure B.
When pure methanol is mixed with water, the resulting solution
feels warm. Would you expect this solution to be ideal? Explain.
Detergent molecules can stabilize the emulsion of oil in water
as well as remove dirt from soiled clothes. A typical detergent
is sodium dodecylsulfate, or SDS, and it has a formula of
CH3 1CH2 2 10CH2SO4Na. In aqueous solution, SDS suspends
oil or dirt by forming small aggregates of detergent anions called
micelles. Propose a structure for micelles.
For an acid or a base, when is the normality of a solution equal
to the molarity of the solution and when are the two concentration units different?
In order for sodium chloride to dissolve in water, a small amount
of energy must be added during solution formation. This is not
energetically favorable. Why is NaCl so soluble in water?

520

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

21. Which of the following statements is(are) true? Correct the false
statements.
a. The vapor pressure of a solution is directly related to the mole
fraction of solute.
b. When a solute is added to water, the water in solution has a
lower vapor pressure than that of pure ice at 0°C.
c. Colligative properties depend only on the identity of the solute
and not on the number of solute particles present.
d. When sugar is added to water, the boiling point of the solution increases above 100°C because sugar has a higher boiling point than water.
22. Is the following statement true of false? Explain your answer.
When determining the molar mass of a solute using boiling point
of freezing point data, camphor would be the best solvent choice
of all of the solvents listed in Table 11.5.
23. Explain the terms isotonic solution, crenation, and hemolysis.
24. What is ion pairing?

Exercises

30. A bottle of wine contains 12.5% ethanol by volume. The density
of ethanol (C2H5OH) is 0.789 g/cm3. Calculate the concentration
of ethanol in wine in terms of mass percent and molality.
31. A 1.37 M solution of citric acid (H3C6H5O7) in water has a density of 1.10 g/cm3. Calculate the mass percent, molality, mole fraction, and normality of the citric acid. Citric acid has three acidic
protons.
32. Calculate the molarity and mole fraction of acetone in a 1.00 m
solution of acetone (CH3COCH3) in ethanol (C2H5OH). (Density of acetone  0.788 g/cm3; density of ethanol  0.789 g/cm3.)
Assume that the volumes of acetone and ethanol add.

Energetics of Solutions and Solubility
33. The lattice energy* of NaI is 686 kJ/mol, and the enthalpy of
hydration is 694 kJ/mol. Calculate the enthalpy of solution per
mole of solid NaI. Describe the process to which this enthalpy
change applies.
34. a. Use the following data to calculate the enthalpy of hydration
for calcium chloride and calcium iodide.

In this section similar exercises are paired.

Concentration of Solutions

Lattice Energy

25. A solution of phosphoric acid was made by dissolving 10.0 g of
H3PO4 in 100.0 mL of water. The resulting volume was 104 mL.
Calculate the density, mole fraction, molarity, and molality of the
solution. Assume water has a density of 1.00 g/cm3.
26. An aqueous antifreeze solution is 40.0% ethylene glycol (C2H6O2)
by mass. The density of the solution is 1.05 g/cm3.Calculate the
molality, molarity, and mole fraction of the ethylene glycol.
27. Common commercial acids and bases are aqueous solutions with
the following properties:

Hydrochloric acid
Nitric acid
Sulfuric acid
Acetic acid
Ammonia

Density
(g/cm3)

Mass Percent
of Solute

1.19
1.42
1.84
1.05
0.90

38
70.
95
99
28

Calculate the molarity, molality, and mole fraction of each of the
preceding reagents.
28. In lab you need to prepare at least 100 mL of each of the following solutions. Explain how you would proceed using the
given information.
a. 2.0 m KCl in water (density of H2O  1.00 g/cm3)
b. 15% NaOH by mass in water (d  1.00 g/cm3)
c. 25% NaOH by mass in CH3OH 1d  0.79 g/cm3 2
d. 0.10 mole fraction of C6H12O6 in water (d  1.00 g/cm3)
29. A solution is prepared by mixing 25 mL pentane (C5H12, d 
0.63 g/cm3) with 45 mL hexane (C6H14, d  0.66 g/cm3). Assuming that the volumes add on mixing, calculate the mass
percent, mole fraction, molality, and molarity of the pentane.

CaCl2(s)
CaI2(s)

2247 kJ/mol
2059 kJ/mol

Hsoln
46 kJ/mol
104 kJ/mol

b. Based on your answers to part a, which ion, Cl or I, is more
strongly attracted to water?
35. Although Al(OH)3 is insoluble in water, NaOH is very soluble.
Explain in terms of lattice energies.
36. The high melting points of ionic solids indicate that a lot of energy must be supplied to separate the ions from one another. How
is it possible that the ions can separate from one another when
soluble ionic compounds are dissolved in water, often with essentially no temperature change?
37. Which solvent, water or carbon tetrachloride, would you choose
to dissolve each of the following?
a. KrF2
e. MgF2
b. SF2
f. CH2O
c. SO2
g. CH2 “CH2
d. CO2
38. Which solvent, water or hexane (C6H14), would you choose to
dissolve each of the following?
a. NaCl
c. octane (C8H18)
b. HF
d. (NH4)2SO4
39. What factors cause one solute to be more strongly attracted to
water than another? For each of the following pairs, predict
which substance would be more soluble in water.
a. CH3CH2OH or CH3CH2CH3
b. CHCl3 or CCl4
c. CH3CH2OH or CH3(CH2)14CH2OH

*Lattice energy was deﬁned in Chapter 8 as the energy change for the
process M(g)  X(g) n MX(s).

Exercises
40. Which ion in each of the following pairs would you expect to
be more strongly hydrated? Why?
a. Na or Mg2
d. F or Br
2
2
b. Mg or Be
e. Cl or ClO4
2
3
c. Fe or Fe
f. ClO4 or SO42
41. Rationalize the trend in water solubility for the following simple alcohols:

Alcohol
Methanol, CH3OH
Ethanol, CH3CH2OH
Propanol, CH3CH2CH2OH
Butanol, CH3(CH2)2CH2OH
Pentanol, CH3(CH2)3CH2OH
Hexanol, CH3(CH2)4CH2OH
Heptanol, CH3(CH2)5CH2OH

Solubility
(g/100 g H2O
at 20ºC)
Soluble in all
proportions
Soluble in all
proportions
Soluble in all
proportions
8.14
2.64
0.59
0.09

42. The solubility of benzoic acid (HC7H5O2),

is 0.34 g/100 mL in water at 25°C and is 10.0 g/100 mL in benzene (C6H6) at 25°C. Rationalize this solubility behavior. (Hint:
Benzoic acid forms a dimer in benzene.) Would benzoic acid be
more or less soluble in a 0.1 M NaOH solution than it is in water? Explain.
43. The solubility of nitrogen in water is 8.21  104 mol/L at 0°C
when the N2 pressure above water is 0.790 atm. Calculate the
Henry’s law constant for N2 in units of mol/L  atm for Henry’s
law in the form C  kP, where C is the gas concentration in
mol/L. Calculate the solubility of N2 in water when the partial
pressure of nitrogen above water is 1.10 atm at 0°C.
44. In Exercise 107 in Chapter 5, the pressure of CO2 in a bottle of
sparkling wine was calculated assuming that the CO2 was insoluble in water. This was a bad assumption. Redo this problem
by assuming that CO2 obeys Henry’s law. Use the data given in
that problem to calculate the partial pressure of CO2 in the gas
phase and the solubility of CO2 in the wine at 25°C. The Henry’s
law constant for CO2 is 3.1  102 mol/L  atm at 25°C with
Henry’s law in the form C  kP, where C is the concentration
of the gas in mol/L.

Vapor Pressures of Solutions
45. Glycerin, C3H8O3, is a nonvolatile liquid. What is the vapor pressure of a solution made by adding 164 g of glycerin to 338 mL
of H2O at 39.8°C? The vapor pressure of pure water at 39.8°C
is 54.74 torr and its density is 0.992 g/cm3.

521

46. The vapor pressure of a solution containing 53.6 g glycerin
(C3H8O3) in 133.7 g ethanol (C2H5OH) is 113 torr at 40°C. Calculate the vapor pressure of pure ethanol at 40°C assuming that
glycerin is a nonvolatile, nonelectrolyte solute in ethanol.
47. At a certain temperature, the vapor pressure of pure benzene
(C6H6) is 0.930 atm. A solution was prepared by dissolving 10.0
g of a nondissociating, nonvolatile solute in 78.11 g of benzene
at that temperature. The vapor pressure of the solution was found
to be 0.900 atm. Assuming the solution behaves ideally, determine the molar mass of the solute.
48. A solution of sodium chloride in water has a vapor pressure of
19.6 torr at 25°C. What is the mole fraction of NaCl solute particles in this solution? What would be the vapor pressure of this solution at 45°C? The vapor pressure of pure water is 23.8 torr at
25°C and 71.9 torr at 45°C and assume sodium chloride exists
as Na and Cl ions in solution.
49. Pentane (C5H12) and hexane (C6H14) form an ideal solution.
At 25°C the vapor pressures of pentane and hexane are 511
and 150. torr, respectively. A solution is prepared by mixing
25 mL pentane (density, 0.63 g/mL) with 45 mL hexane (density,
0.66 g/mL).
a. What is the vapor pressure of the resulting solution?
b. What is the composition by mole fraction of pentane in the
vapor that is in equilibrium with this solution?
50. A solution is prepared by mixing 0.0300 mol CH2Cl2 and 0.0500
mol CH2Br2 at 25°C. Assuming the solution is ideal, calculate
the composition of the vapor (in terms of mole fractions) at 25°C.
At 25°C, the vapor pressures of pure CH2Cl2 and pure CH2Br2
are 133 and 11.4 torr, respectively.
51. What is the composition of a methanol (CH3OH)–propanol
(CH3CH2CH2OH) solution that has a vapor pressure of 174 torr
at 40°C? At 40°C, the vapor pressures of pure methanol and pure
propanol are 303 and 44.6 torr, respectively. Assume the solution is ideal.
52. Benzene and toluene form an ideal solution. Consider a solution
of benzene and toluene prepared at 25°C. Assuming the mole
fractions of benzene and toluene in the vapor phase are equal,
calculate the composition of the solution. At 25°C the vapor pressures of benzene and toluene are 95 and 28 torr, respectively.
53. Which of the following will have the lowest total vapor pressure
at 25°C?
a. pure water (vapor pressure  23.8 torr at 25°C)
b. a solution of glucose in water with xC6H12O6  0.01
c. a solution of sodium chloride in water with xNaCl  0.01
d. a solution of methanol in water with xCH3OH  0.2 (Consider
the vapor pressure of both methanol [143 torr at 25°C] and
water.)
54. Which of the choices in Exercise 53 has the highest vapor pressure?
55. A solution is made by mixing 50.0 g acetone (CH3COCH3) and
50.0 g methanol (CH3OH). What is the vapor pressure of this
solution at 25°C? What is the composition of the vapor expressed
as a mole fraction? Assume ideal solution and gas behavior. (At
25°C the vapor pressures of pure acetone and pure methanol are
271 and 143 torr, respectively.) The actual vapor pressure of this
solution is 161 torr. Explain any discrepancies.

522

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

56. The vapor pressures of several solutions of water–propanol
(CH3CH2CH2OH) were determined at various compositions,
with the following data collected at 45°C:

xH

2O

Vapor pressure
(torr)

0
0.15
0.37
0.54
0.69
0.83
1.00

74.0
77.3
80.2
81.6
80.6
78.2
71.9

a. Are solutions of water and propanol ideal? Explain.
b. Predict the sign of ¢Hsoln for water–propanol solutions.
c. Are the interactive forces between propanol and water molecules weaker than, stronger than, or equal to the interactive
forces between the pure substances? Explain.
d. Which of the solutions in the data would have the lowest normal boiling point?

Colligative Properties
57. A solution is prepared by dissolving 27.0 g of urea, (NH2)2CO,
in 150.0 g of water. Calculate the boiling point of the solution.
Urea is a nonelectrolyte.
58. A 2.00-g sample of a large biomolecule was dissolved in 15.0 g
of carbon tetrachloride. The boiling point of this solution was
determined to be 77.85°C. Calculate the molar mass of the biomolecule. For carbon tetrachloride, the boiling-point constant is
5.03°C  kg/mol, and the boiling point of pure carbon tetrachloride is 76.50°C.
59. What mass of glycerin (C3H8O3), a nonelectrolyte, must be dissolved in 200.0 g water to give a solution with a freezing point
of 1.50°C?
60. The freezing point of t-butanol is 25.50°C and Kf is 9.1°C  kg/mol.
Usually t-butanol absorbs water on exposure to air. If the freezing point of a 10.0-g sample of t-butanol is 24.59°C, how many
grams of water are present in the sample?

65. a. Calculate the freezing-point depression and osmotic pressure
at 25°C of an aqueous solution containing 1.0 g/L of a
protein (molar mass  9.0  104 g/mol) if the density of the
solution is 1.0 g/cm3.
b. Considering your answer to part a, which colligative property,
freezing-point depression or osmotic pressure, would be better
used to determine the molar masses of large molecules? Explain.
66. An aqueous solution of 10.00 g of catalase, an enzyme found in
the liver, has a volume of 1.00 L at 27°C. The solution’s osmotic
pressure at 27°C is found to be 0.74 torr. Calculate the molar
mass of catalase.
67. If the human eye has an osmotic pressure of 8.00 atm at 25°C,
what concentration of solute particles in water will provide an isotonic eyedrop solution (a solution with equal osmotic pressure)?
68. How would you prepare 1.0 L of an aqueous solution of sodium
chloride having an osmotic pressure of 15 atm at 22°C? Assume
sodium chloride exists as Na and Cl ions in solution.

Properties of Electrolyte Solutions
69. Consider the following solutions:
0.010 m Na3PO4 in water
0.020 m CaBr2 in water
0.020 m KCl in water
0.020 m HF in water (HF is a weak acid.)
a. Assuming complete dissociation of the soluble salts, which
solution(s) would have the same boiling point as 0.040 m
C6H12O6 in water? C6H12O6 is a nonelectrolyte.
b. Which solution would have the highest vapor pressure at 28°C?
c. Which solution would have the largest freezing-point depression?
70. From the following:
pure water
solution of C12H22O11 (m  0.01) in water
solution of NaCl (m  0.01) in water
solution of CaCl2 (m  0.01) in water
choose the one with the
a. highest freezing point.
b. lowest freezing point.
c. highest boiling point.

d. lowest boiling point.
e. highest osmotic pressure.

61. Calculate the freezing point and boiling point of an antifreeze
solution that is 50.0% by mass of ethylene glycol
(HOCH2CH2OH) in water. Ethylene glycol is a nonelectrolyte.
62. What volume of ethylene glycol (C2H6O2), a nonelectrolyte, must
be added to 15.0 L of water to produce an antifreeze solution
with a freezing point of 25.0°C? What is the boiling point of
this solution? (The density of ethylene glycol is 1.11 g/cm3, and
the density of water is 1.00 g/cm3.)

71. Calculate the freezing point and the boiling point of each of the
following aqueous solutions. (Assume complete dissociation.)
a. 0.050 m MgCl2
b. 0.050 m FeCl3
72. A water desalination plant is set up near a salt marsh containing
water that is 0.10 M NaCl. Calculate the minimum pressure that
must be applied at 20.°C to purify the water by reverse osmosis. Assume NaCl is completely dissociated.

63. Thyroxine, an important hormone that controls the rate of metabolism in the body, can be isolated from the thyroid gland.
When 0.455 g of thyroxine is dissolved in 10.0 g of benzene,
the freezing point of the solution is depressed by 0.300°C. What
is the molar mass of thyroxine? See Table 11.5.
64. Anthraquinone contains only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen and
has an empirical formula of C7H4O. The freezing point of camphor
is lowered by 22.3°C when 1.32 g anthraquinone is dissolved in
11.4 g camphor. Determine the molecular formula of anthraquinone.

73. Use the following data for three aqueous solutions of CaCl2 to
calculate the apparent value of the van’t Hoff factor.

Molality

Freezing-Point Depression (°C)

0.0225
0.0910
0.278

0.110
0.440
1.330

Challenge Problems
74. Calculate the freezing point and the boiling point of each of
the following solutions using the observed van’t Hoff factors in
Table 11.6.
a. 0.050 m MgCl2
b. 0.050 m FeCl3
75. In the winter of 1994, record low temperatures were registered
throughout the United States. For example, in Champaign, Illinois, a record low of 29°F was registered. At this temperature
can salting icy roads with CaCl2 be effective in melting the ice?
a. Assume i  3.00 for CaCl2.
b. Assume the average value of i from Exercise 73.
(The solubility of CaCl2 in cold water is 74.5 g per 100.0 g of
water.)
76. A 0.500-g sample of a compound is dissolved in enough water
to form 100.0 mL of solution. This solution has an osmotic pressure of 2.50 atm at 25°C. If each molecule of the solute dissociates into two particles (in this solvent), what is the molar mass
of this solute?

523

82. If the ﬂuid inside a tree is about 0.1 M more concentrated
in solute than the groundwater that bathes the roots, how high
will a column of ﬂuid rise in the tree at 25°C? Assume that the
density of the ﬂuid is 1.0 g/cm3. (The density of mercury is 13.6
g/cm3.)
83. An unknown compound contains only carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen. Combustion analysis of the compound gives mass percents of 31.57% C and 5.30% H. The molar mass is determined
by measuring the freezing-point depression of an aqueous solution. A freezing point of 5.20°C is recorded for a solution
made by dissolving 10.56 g of the compound in 25.0 g water.
Determine the empirical formula, molar mass, and molecular
formula of the compound. Assume that the compound is a
nonelectrolyte.
84. Consider the following:

Additional Exercises
77. In a coffee-cup calorimeter, 1.60 g of NH4NO3 was mixed with
75.0 g of water at an initial temperature of 25.00°C. After dissolution of the salt, the ﬁnal temperature of the calorimeter contents was 23.34°C.
a. Assuming the solution has a heat capacity of 4.18 J/g  °C,
and assuming no heat loss to the calorimeter, calculate the
enthalpy of solution ( ¢Hsoln) for the dissolution of NH4NO3
in units of kJ/mol.
b. If the enthalpy of hydration for NH4NO3 is 630. kJ/mol,
calculate the lattice energy of NH4NO3.
78. In ﬂushing and cleaning columns used in liquid chromatography
to remove adsorbed contaminants, a series of solvents is used.
Hexane (C6H14), chloroform (CHCl3), methanol (CH3OH), and
water are passed through the column in that order. Rationalize
the order in terms of intermolecular forces and the mutual solubility (miscibility) of the solvents.
79. Explain the following on the basis of the behavior of atoms
and/or ions.
a. Cooking with water is faster in a pressure cooker than in an
open pan.
b. Salt is used on icy roads.
c. Melted sea ice from the Artic Ocean produces fresh water.
d. CO2(s) (dry ice) does not have a normal boiling point under
normal atmospheric conditions, even though CO2 is a liquid
in ﬁre extinguishers.
e. Adding a solute to a solvent extends the liquid phase over a
larger temperature range.
80. The term “proof ” is deﬁned as twice the percent by volume
of pure ethanol in solution. Thus, a solution that is 95% (by
volume) ethanol is 190 proof. What is the molarity of ethanol
in a 92 proof ethanol/water solution? Assume the density
of ethanol, C2H5OH, is 0.79 g/cm3 and the density of water is
1.0 g/cm3.
81. At 25°C, the vapor in equilibrium with a solution containing carbon disulﬁde and acetonitrile has a total pressure of 263 torr and
is 85.5 mole percent carbon disulﬁde. What is the mole fraction
of carbon disulﬁde in the solution? At 25°C, the vapor pressure
of carbon disulﬁde is 375 torr. Assume the solution and vapor
exhibit ideal behavior.

What would happen to the level of liquid in the two arms if the
semipermeable membrane separating the two liquids were permeable to
a. H2O only?
b. H2O, Na, and Cl?
85. Consider an aqueous solution containing sodium chloride that
has a density of 1.01 g/mL. Assume the solution behaves ideally. The freezing point of this solution at 1.0 atm is 1.28°C.
Calculate the percent composition of this solution (by mass).
86. What stabilizes a colloidal suspension? Explain why adding heat
or adding an electrolyte can cause the suspended particles to settle out.
87. The freezing point of an aqueous solution is 2.79°C.
a. Determine the boiling point of this solution.
b. Determine the vapor pressure (in mm Hg) of this solution at
25°C (the vapor pressure of pure water at 25°C is 23.76 mm
Hg).
c. Explain any assumptions you make in solving parts a and b.

Challenge Problems
88. The vapor pressure of pure benzene is 750.0 torr and the vapor
pressure of toluene is 300.0 torr at a certain temperature. You
make a solution by pouring “some” benzene with “some”
toluene. You then place this solution in a closed container and
wait for the vapor to come into equilibrium with the solution.
Next, you condense the vapor. You put this liquid (the condensed
vapor) in a closed container and wait for the vapor to come into
equilibrium with the solution. You then condense this vapor and
ﬁnd the mole fraction of benzene in this vapor to be 0.714.
Determine the mole fraction of benzene in the original solution
assuming the solution behaves ideally.
89. Liquid A has vapor pressure x, and liquid B has vapor pressure y. What is the mole fraction of the liquid mixture if the
vapor above the solution is 30.% A by moles? 50.% A? 80.% A?
(Calculate in terms of x and y.)
Liquid A has vapor pressure x, liquid B has vapor pressure y.
What is the mole fraction of the vapor above the solution if the
liquid mixture is 30.% A by moles? 50.% A? 80.% A? (Calculate
in terms of x and y.)

524

Chapter Eleven Properties of Solutions

90. Erythrocytes are red blood cells containing hemoglobin. In a
saline solution they shrivel when the salt concentration is high
and swell when the salt concentration is low. In a 25°C aqueous
solution of NaCl, whose freezing point is 0.406°C, erythrocytes neither swell nor shrink. If we want to calculate the osmotic
pressure of the solution inside the erythrocytes under these conditions, what do we need to assume? Why? Estimate how good
(or poor) of an assumption this is. Make this assumption and
calculate the osmotic pressure of the solution inside the
erythrocytes.
91. You make 20.0 g of a sucrose (C12H22O11) and NaCl mixture
and dissolve it in 1.00 kg of water. The freezing point of this
solution is found to be 0.426°C. Assuming ideal behavior,
calculate the mass percent composition of the original
mixture, and the mole fraction of sucrose in the original
mixture.
92. An aqueous solution is 1.00% NaCl by mass and has a density
of 1.071 g/cm3 at 25°C. The observed osmotic pressure of this
solution is 7.83 atm at 25°C.
a. What fraction of the moles of NaCl in this solution exist as
ion pairs?
b. Calculate the freezing point that would be observed for this
solution.
93. The vapor in equilibrium with a pentane–hexane solution at 25°C
has a mole fraction of pentane equal to 0.15 at 25°C. What is
the mole fraction of pentane in the solution? (See Exercise 49
for the vapor pressures of the pure liquids.)
94. A forensic chemist is given a white solid that is suspected of being pure cocaine (C17H21NO4, molar mass  303.35 g/mol). She
dissolves 1.22  0.01 g of the solid in 15.60  0.01 g benzene.
The freezing point is lowered by 1.32  0.04°C.
a. What is the molar mass of the substance? Assuming that the
percent uncertainty in the calculated molar mass is the same
as the percent uncertainty in the temperature change, calculate the uncertainty in the molar mass.
b. Could the chemist unequivocally state that the substance is
cocaine? For example, is the uncertainty small enough to
distinguish cocaine from codeine (C18H21NO3, molar mass 
299.36 g/mol)?
c. Assuming that the absolute uncertainties in the measurements of temperature and mass remain unchanged,
how could the chemist improve the precision of her
results?
95. A 1.60-g sample of a mixture of naphthalene (C10H8) and anthracene (C14H10) is dissolved in 20.0 g benzene (C6H6). The
freezing point of the solution is 2.81°C. What is the composition as mass percent of the sample mixture? The freezing point
of benzene is 5.51°C, and Kf is 5.12°C  kg/mol.
96. A solid mixture contains MgCl2 and NaCl. When 0.5000 g of this
solid is dissolved in enough water to form 1.000 L of solution,
the osmotic pressure at 25.0°C is observed to be 0.3950 atm.
What is the mass percent of MgCl2 in the solid? (Assume ideal
behavior for the solution.)
97. Formic acid (HCO2H) is a monoprotic acid that ionizes only partially in aqueous solutions. A 0.10 M formic acid solution is 4.2%
ionized. Assuming that the molarity and molality of the solution

are the same, calculate the freezing point and the boiling point
of 0.10 M formic acid.
98. Speciﬁcations for lactated Ringer’s solution, which is used for
intravenous (IV) injections, are as follows to reach 100. mL of
solution:
285–315 mg Na
14.1–17.3 mg K
4.9–6.0 mg Ca2
368–408 mg Cl
231–261 mg lactate, C3H5O3
a. Specify the amounts of NaCl, KCl, CaCl2  2H2O, and
NaC3H5O3 needed to prepare 100. mL of lactated Ringer’s
solution.
b. What is the range of the osmotic pressure of the solution at
37°C, given the above speciﬁcations?
99. In some regions of the southwest United States, the water
is very hard. For example, in Las Cruces, New Mexico, the tap
water contains about 560 mg of dissolved solids per milliliter.
Reverse osmosis units are marketed in this area to soften water.
A typical unit exerts a pressure of 8.0 atm and can produce
45 L of water per day.
a. Assuming all of the dissolved solids are MgCO3 and assuming a temperature of 27°C, what total volume of water must
be processed to produce 45 L of pure water?
b. Would the same system work for purifying seawater? (Assume seawater is 0.60 M NaCl.)

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

100. Creatinine, C4H7N3O, is a by-product of muscle metabolism,
and creatinine levels in the body are known to be a fairly reliable indicator of kidney function. The normal level of creatinine in the blood for adults is approximately 1.0 mg per
deciliter (dL) of blood. If the density of blood is 1.025 g/mL,
calculate the molality of a normal creatinine level in a 10.0-mL
blood sample. What is the osmotic pressure of this solution at
25.0°C?
101. An aqueous solution containing 0.250 mol of Q, a strong electrolyte, in 5.00  102 g of water freezes at 2.79°C. What is
the van’t Hoff factor for Q? The molal freezing-point depression
constant for water is 1.86°C  kg/mol. What is the formula of Q
if it is 38.68% chlorine by mass and there are twice as many anions as cations in one formula unit of Q?
102. Patients undergoing an upper gastrointestinal tract laboratory test
are typically given an X-ray contrast agent that aids with the
radiologic imaging of the anatomy. One such contrast agent is
sodium diatrizoate, a nonvolatile water-soluble compound.
A 0.378 m solution is prepared by dissolving 38.4 g of sodium
diatrizoate (NaDTZ) in 1.60  102 mL of water at 31.2°C
(the density of water at 31.2°C is 0.995 g/mL). What is the
molar mass of sodium diatrizoate? What is the vapor pressure
of this solution if the vapor pressure of pure water at 31.2°C is
34.1 torr?

Marathon Problem

Marathon Problem*
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

103. Using the following information, identify the strong electrolyte
whose general formula is
Mx 1A2 y  zH2O
Ignore the effect of interionic attractions in the solution.
a. An is a common oxyanion. When 30.0 mg of the anhydrous
sodium salt containing this oxyanion (NanA, where n  1, 2,
or 3) is reduced, 15.26 mL of 0.02313 M reducing agent is
required to react completely with the NanA present. Assume
a 1:1 mole ratio in the reaction.

*This Marathon Problem was developed by James H. Burness, Penn State
University, York Campus. Reprinted with permission from the Journal of
Chemical Education, Vol. 68, No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright ©
1991, Division of Chemical Education, Inc.

525

b. The cation is derived from a silvery white metal that is
relatively expensive. The metal itself crystallizes in a
body-centered cubic unit cell and has an atomic radius of
198.4 pm. The solid, pure metal has a density of 5.243 g/cm3.
The oxidation number of M in the strong electrolyte in question is 3.
c. When 33.45 mg of the compound is present (dissolved) in
10.0 mL of aqueous solution at 25°C, the solution has an
osmotic pressure of 558 torr.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

12 Chemical Kinetics
Contents
12.1
12.2
•
12.3
•
12.4
•
•
•
•
•
12.5
12.6
12.7
12.8
•
•

Reaction Rates
Rate Laws: An Introduction
Types of Rate Laws
Determining the Form of
the Rate Law
Method of Initial Rates
The Integrated Rate Law
First-Order Rate Laws
Half-Life of a First-Order
Reaction
Second-Order Rate Laws
Zero-Order Rate Laws
Integrated Rate Laws for
Reactions with More Than
One Reactant
Rate Laws: A Summary
Reaction Mechanisms
A Model for Chemical
Kinetics
Catalysis
Heterogeneous Catalysis
Homogeneous Catalysis

The kinetic energy of these world championship runners is evident in the 800-meter race at
Saint-Denis, France.

526

T

he applications of chemistry focus largely on chemical reactions, and the commercial use of a reaction requires knowledge of several of its characteristics, including its
stoichiometry, energetics, and rate. A reaction is deﬁned by its reactants and products,
whose identity must be learned by experiment. Once the reactants and products are known,
the equation for the reaction can be written and balanced, and stoichiometric calculations
can be carried out. Another very important characteristic of a reaction is its spontaneity.
Spontaneity refers to the inherent tendency for the process to occur; however, it implies
nothing about speed. Spontaneous does not mean fast. There are many spontaneous reactions that are so slow that no apparent reaction occurs over a period of weeks or years at
normal temperatures. For example, there is a strong inherent tendency for gaseous
hydrogen and oxygen to combine, that is,
2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1l2
but in fact the two gases can coexist indeﬁnitely at 25°C. Similarly, the gaseous reactions
H2 1g2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2HCl1g2
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
Visualization: Coffee Creamer
Flammability

are both highly likely to occur from a thermodynamic standpoint, but we observe no reactions under normal conditions. In addition, the process of changing diamond to graphite
is spontaneous but is so slow that it is not detectable.
To be useful, reactions must occur at a reasonable rate. To produce the 20 million
tons of ammonia needed each year for fertilizer, we cannot simply mix nitrogen and hydrogen gases at 25°C and wait for them to react. It is not enough to understand the stoichiometry and thermodynamics of a reaction; we also must understand the factors that
govern the rate of the reaction. The area of chemistry that concerns reaction rates is called
chemical kinetics.
One of the main goals of chemical kinetics is to understand the steps by which
a reaction takes place. This series of steps is called the reaction mechanism. Understanding the mechanism allows us to ﬁnd ways to facilitate the reaction. For example,
the Haber process for the production of ammonia requires high temperatures to
achieve commercially feasible reaction rates. However, even higher temperatures
(and more cost) would be required without the use of iron oxide, which speeds up the
reaction.
In this chapter we will consider the main ideas of chemical kinetics. We will explore
rate laws, reaction mechanisms, and simple models for chemical reactions.

12.1
The kinetics of air pollution is discussed
in Section 12.8.

Reaction Rates

To introduce the concept of the rate of a reaction, we will consider the decomposition of
nitrogen dioxide, a gas that causes air pollution. Nitrogen dioxide decomposes to nitric
oxide and oxygen as follows:
2NO2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2  O2 1g2
Suppose in a particular experiment we start with a ﬂask of nitrogen dioxide at 300°C and
measure the concentrations of nitrogen dioxide, nitric oxide, and oxygen as the nitrogen
dioxide decomposes. The results of this experiment are summarized in Table 12.1, and
the data are plotted in Fig. 12.1.

527

528

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

The energy required for athletic exertion, the breaching of an Orca whale, and the combustion of fuel in a race car all result from chemical reactions.

Note from these results that the concentration of the reactant (NO2) decreases with
time and the concentrations of the products (NO and O2) increase with time (see Fig. 12.2).
Chemical kinetics deals with the speed at which these changes occur. The speed, or rate,
of a process is deﬁned as the change in a given quantity over a speciﬁc period of time.
For chemical reactions, the quantity that changes is the amount or concentration of a
reactant or product. So the reaction rate of a chemical reaction is deﬁned as the change
in concentration of a reactant or product per unit time:
Rate 
[A] means concentration of A in mol/L.



concentration of A at time t2  concentration of A at time t1
t2  t1
¢ 3 A4
¢t

12.1 Reaction Rates

529

TABLE 12.1 Concentrations of Reactant and Products as
a Function of Time for the Reaction 2NO2(g) S 2NO(g) 
O2(g) (at 300ºC)
Concentration (mol/L)
Time (1 s)

NO2

NO

O2

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400

0.0100
0.0079
0.0065
0.0055
0.0048
0.0043
0.0038
0.0034
0.0031

0
0.0021
0.0035
0.0045
0.0052
0.0057
0.0062
0.0066
0.0069

0
0.0011
0.0018
0.0023
0.0026
0.0029
0.0031
0.0033
0.0035

0.0100

NO2

0.0075

∆[NO2]

Concentrations (mol/ L)

0.0026

0.0006
70 s

∆t

0.005

110 s

NO

0.0003
70 s

0.0025
O2

FIGURE 12.1
Starting with a ﬂask of nitrogen dioxide
at 300°C, the concentrations of nitrogen
dioxide, nitric oxide, and oxygen are
plotted versus time.

50

100

150

200
Time (s)

250

300

350

400

530

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

FIGURE 12.2
Representation of the reaction 2NO2(g) S
2NO(g)  O2( g). (a) The reaction at the
very beginning (t  0). (b) and (c) As time
passes, NO2 is converted to NO and O2.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Time

where A is the reactant or product being considered, and the square brackets indicate concentration in mol/L. As usual, the symbol indicates a change in a given quantity. Note
that a change can be positive (increase) or negative (decrease), thus leading to a positive
or negative reaction rate by this deﬁnition. However, for convenience, we will always
deﬁne the rate as a positive quantity, as we will see.
Now let us calculate the average rate at which the concentration of NO2 changes over
the ﬁrst 50 seconds of the reaction using the data given in Table 12.1.
Change in 3NO2 4
¢ 3NO2 4

Time elapsed
¢t
3NO2 4 t50  3NO2 4 t0

50. s  0 s
0.0079 mol/L  0.0100 mol/L

50. s
 4.2  105 mol/L  s
Note that since the concentration of NO2 decreases with time, ¢[NO2 ] is a negative quantity. Because it is customary to work with positive reaction rates, we deﬁne the rate of
this particular reaction as
Rate  
Appendix 1.3 reviews slopes of straight
lines.

¢ 3NO2 4
¢t

Since the concentrations of reactants always decrease with time, any rate expression involving a reactant will include a negative sign. The average rate of this reaction from 0
to 50 seconds is then
¢ 3NO2 4
¢t
 14.2  105 mol/L  s2
 4.2  105 mol/L  s

Rate  
TABLE 12.2 Average Rate (in
mol/L  s) of Decomposition of
Nitrogen Dioxide as a Function
of Time*
¢[NO2]
¢t
4.2  105
2.8  105
2.0  105
1.4  105
1.0  105

Time Period (s)
0
50
100
150
200

S
S
S
S
S

50
100
150
200
250

*Note that the rate decreases with time.

The average rates for this reaction during several other time intervals are given in
Table 12.2. Note that the rate is not constant but decreases with time. The rates given in
Table 12.2 are average rates over 50-second time intervals. The value of the rate at a particular time (the instantaneous rate) can be obtained by computing the slope of a line
tangent to the curve at that point. Figure 12.1 shows a tangent drawn at t  100 seconds.
The slope of this line gives the rate at t  100 seconds as follows:
Slope of the tangent line 


change in y
change in x
¢ 3NO2 4
¢t

12.1 Reaction Rates

531

Los Angeles on a clear day, and on a day when air pollution is signiﬁcant.

But
Therefore,

Rate  

¢ 3NO2 4
¢t

Rate  1slope of the tangent line2
0.0026 mol/L
 a
b
110 s
 2.4  105 mol/L  s

So far we have discussed the rate of this reaction only in terms of the reactant. The
rate also can be deﬁned in terms of the products. However, in doing so we must take into
account the coefﬁcients in the balanced equation for the reaction, because the stoichiometry determines the relative rates of consumption of reactants and generation of products.
For example, in the reaction we are considering,
2NO2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2  O2 1g2
both the reactant NO2 and the product NO have a coefﬁcient of 2, so NO is produced at
the same rate as NO2 is consumed. We can verify this from Fig. 12.1. Note that the curve
for NO is the same shape as the curve for NO2, except that it is inverted, or ﬂipped over.
This means that, at any point in time, the slope of the tangent to the curve for NO will
be the negative of the slope to the curve for NO2. (Verify this at the point t  100 seconds on both curves.) In the balanced equation, the product O2 has a coefﬁcient of 1,
which means it is produced half as fast as NO, since NO has a coefﬁcient of 2. That is,
the rate of NO production is twice the rate of O2 production.
We also can verify this fact from Fig. 12.1. For example, at t  250 seconds,
6.0  104 mol/L
70. s
 8.6  106 mol/L  s
3.0  104 mol/L
Slope of the tangent to the O2 curve 
70. s
 4.3  106 mol/L  s

Slope of the tangent to the NO curve 

The slope at t  250 seconds on the NO curve is twice the slope of that point on the O2
curve, showing that the rate of production of NO is twice that of O2.

532

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics
The rate information can be summarized as follows:
Rate of consumption
of NO2


¢ 3NO2 4
¢t



rate of production
of NO





¢ 3 NO4
¢t



2(rate of production of O2)

2a

¢ 3O2 4
b
¢t

We have seen that the rate of a reaction is not constant, but that it changes with time.
This is so because the concentrations change with time (Fig. 12.1).
Because the reaction rate changes with time, and because the rate is different (by factors that depend on the coefﬁcients in the balanced equation) depending on which reactant or product is being studied, we must be very speciﬁc when we describe a rate for a
chemical reaction.

12.2

Rate Laws: An Introduction

Chemical reactions are reversible. In our discussion of the decomposition of nitrogen dioxide, we have so far considered only the forward reaction, as shown here:
2NO2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2  O2 1g2
However, the reverse reaction also can occur. As NO and O2 accumulate, they can react
to re-form NO2:
O2 1g2  2NO1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

When gaseous NO2 is placed in an otherwise empty container, initially the dominant
reaction is
2NO2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2  O2 1g2
When forward and reverse reaction rates
are equal, there will be no changes in the
concentrations of reactants or products.
This is called chemical equilibrium and is
discussed fully in Chapter 13.

and the change in the concentration of NO2 ( ¢[NO2 ]) depends only on the forward reaction. However, after a period of time, enough products accumulate so that the reverse
reaction becomes important. Now ¢[NO2 ] depends on the difference in the rates of the
forward and reverse reactions. This complication can be avoided if we study the rate of
a reaction under conditions where the reverse reaction makes only a negligible contribution.
Typically, this means that we must study a reaction at a point soon after the reactants are
mixed, before the products have had time to build up to signiﬁcant levels.
If we choose conditions where the reverse reaction can be neglected, the reaction rate
will depend only on the concentrations of the reactants. For the decomposition of nitrogen
dioxide, we can write
Rate  k3NO2 4 n

(12.1)

Such an expression, which shows how the rate depends on the concentrations of reactants,
is called a rate law. The proportionality constant k, called the rate constant, and n, called
the order of the reactant, must both be determined by experiment. The order of a reactant can be an integer (including zero) or a fraction. For the relatively simple reactions
we will consider in this book, the orders will often be positive integers.
Note two important points about Equation (12.1):
1. The concentrations of the products do not appear in the rate law because the reaction
rate is being studied under conditions where the reverse reaction does not contribute
to the overall rate.
2. The value of the exponent n must be determined by experiment; it cannot be written
from the balanced equation.

12.2 Rate Laws: An Introduction

533

Before we go further we must deﬁne exactly what we mean by the term rate in Equation (12.1). In Section 12.1 we saw that reaction rate means a change in concentration per
unit time. However, which reactant or product concentration do we choose in deﬁning the
rate? For example, for the decomposition of NO2 to produce O2 and NO considered in
Section 12.1, we could deﬁne the rate in terms of any of these three species. However,
since O2 is produced only half as fast as NO, we must be careful to specify which species
we are talking about in a given case. For instance, we might choose to deﬁne the reaction
rate in terms of the consumption of NO2:
Rate  

¢ 3NO2 4
 k3NO2 4 n
¢t

On the other hand, we could deﬁne the rate in terms of the production of O2:
Rate¿ 

¢ 3O2 4
 k¿ 3NO2 4 n
¢t

Note that because 2NO2 molecules are consumed for every O2 molecule produced,
or
and

Rate  2  rate¿
k3NO2 4 n  2k¿ 3NO2 4 n
k  2  k¿

Thus the value of the rate constant depends on how the rate is deﬁned.
In this text we will always be careful to deﬁne exactly what is meant by the rate for
a given reaction so that there will be no confusion about which speciﬁc rate constant is
being used.

Types of Rate Laws
Notice that the rate law we have used to this point expresses rate as a function of concentration. For example, for the decomposition of NO2 we have deﬁned
Rate  

The name differential rate law comes
from a mathematical term. We will regard
it simply as a label. The terms differential
rate law and rate law will be used interchangeably in this text.

¢ 3NO2 4
¢t

 k3NO2 4 n

which tells us (once we have determined the value of n) exactly how the rate depends on
the concentration of the reactant, NO2. A rate law that expresses how the rate depends on
concentration is technically called the differential rate law, but it is often simply called
the rate law. Thus when we use the term the rate law in this text, we mean the expression that gives the rate as a function of concentration.
A second kind of rate law, the integrated rate law, also will be important in our
study of kinetics. The integrated rate law expresses how the concentrations depend on
time. Although we will not consider the details here, a given differential rate law is always related to a certain type of integrated rate law, and vice versa. That is, if we determine the differential rate law for a given reaction, we automatically know the form of the
integrated rate law for the reaction. This means that once we determine experimentally
either type of rate law for a reaction, we also know the other one.
Which rate law we choose to determine by experiment often depends on what types
of data are easiest to collect. If we can conveniently measure how the rate changes as
the concentrations are changed, we can readily determine the differential (rate/concentration) rate law. On the other hand, if it is more convenient to measure the concentration as a function of time, we can determine the form of the integrated (concentration/
time) rate law. We will discuss how rate laws are actually determined in the next several
sections.
Why are we interested in determining the rate law for a reaction? How does it help
us? It helps us because we can work backward from the rate law to infer the steps by

534

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics
which the reaction occurs. Most chemical reactions do not take place in a single step but
result from a series of sequential steps. To understand a chemical reaction, we must learn
what these steps are. For example, a chemist who is designing an insecticide may study
the reactions involved in the process of insect growth to see what type of molecule might
interrupt this series of reactions. Or an industrial chemist may be trying to make a given
reaction occur faster. To accomplish this, he or she must know which step is slowest, because it is that step that must be speeded up. Thus a chemist is usually not interested in
a rate law for its own sake but because of what it reveals about the steps by which a reaction occurs. We will develop a process for ﬁnding the reaction steps in this chapter.

Rate Laws: A Summary
䊉

There are two types of rate laws.

1. The differential rate law (often called simply the rate law) shows how the rate of
a reaction depends on concentrations.

2. The integrated rate law shows how the concentrations of species in the reaction
depend on time.
䊉

Because we typically consider reactions only under conditions where the reverse
reaction is unimportant, our rate laws will involve only concentrations of reactants.

䊉

Because the differential and integrated rate laws for a given reaction are related in a
well-deﬁned way, the experimental determination of either of the rate laws is sufﬁcient.

䊉

Experimental convenience usually dictates which type of rate law is determined
experimentally.

䊉

Knowing the rate law for a reaction is important mainly because we can usually infer
the individual steps involved in the reaction from the speciﬁc form of the rate law.

12.3

TABLE 12.3 Concentration/
Time Data for the Reaction
2N2O5 (soln) S 4NO2 (soln) 
O2 ( g) (at 45ºC)
[N2O5] (mol/L)

Time (s)

1.00
0.88
0.78
0.69
0.61
0.54
0.48
0.43
0.38
0.34
0.30

0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000

Determining the Form of the Rate Law

The ﬁrst step in understanding how a given chemical reaction occurs is to determine the
form of the rate law. That is, we need to determine experimentally the power to which
each reactant concentration must be raised in the rate law. In this section we will explore
ways to obtain the differential rate law for a reaction. First, we will consider the decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide in carbon tetrachloride solution:
2N2O5 1soln2 ¡ 4NO2 1soln2  O2 1g2
Data for this reaction at 45°C are listed in Table 12.3 and plotted in Fig. 12.3. In this reaction the oxygen gas escapes from the solution and thus does not react with the nitrogen dioxide, so we do not have to be concerned about the effects of the reverse reaction
at any time over the life of the reaction. That is, the reverse reaction is negligible at all
times over the course of this reaction.
Evaluation of the reaction rates at concentrations of N2O5 of 0.90 M and 0.45 M, by
taking the slopes of the tangents to the curve at these points (see Fig. 12.3), yields the
following data:

[N2O5]

Rate (mol/L  s)

0.90 M
0.45 M

5.4  104
2.7  104

12.3 Determining the Form of the Rate Law

535

1.00
Rate = 5.4 × 10 – 4 mol/L . s

FIGURE 12.3
A plot of the concentration of N2O5
as a function of time for the reaction
2N 2O 5 (soln) S 4NO 2 (soln)  O 2 ( g)
(at 45°C). Note that the reaction rate
at [N 2O 5]  0.90 M is twice that at
[N2O5]  0.45 M.

Visualization: Decomposition
of N2O5

First order: rate  k [A]. Doubling
the concentration of A doubles the
reaction rate.

[N2O5] (mol/ L)

.80
Rate = 2.7 × 10 – 4 mol/L . s

.60
.40
.20

400

800

1200 1600
Time (s)

2000

Note that when [N2O5] is halved, the rate is also halved. This means that the rate of this
reaction depends on the concentration of N2O5 to the ﬁrst power. In other words, the
(differential) rate law for this reaction is
Rate  

¢ 3N2O5 4
 k3N2O5 4 1  k3N2O5 4
¢t

Thus the reaction is ﬁrst order in N2O5. Note that for this reaction the order is not the
same as the coefﬁcient of N2O5 in the balanced equation for the reaction. This reemphasizes the fact that the order of a particular reactant must be obtained by observing how
the reaction rate depends on the concentration of that reactant.
We have seen that by determining the instantaneous rate at two different reactant concentrations, the rate law for the decomposition of N2O5 is shown to have the form
Rate  

¢ 3A4
 k3A4
¢t

where A represents N2O5.

Method of Initial Rates
The value of the initial rate is determined
for each experiment at the same value of
t as close to t  0 as possible.

Visualization: Reaction Rate
and Concentration

One common method for experimentally determining the form of the rate law for a reaction is the method of initial rates. The initial rate of a reaction is the instantaneous rate
determined just after the reaction begins (just after t  0). The idea is to determine the
instantaneous rate before the initial concentrations of reactants have changed signiﬁcantly.
Several experiments are carried out using different initial concentrations, and the initial
rate is determined for each run. The results are then compared to see how the initial rate
depends on the initial concentrations. This allows the form of the rate law to be determined. We will illustrate the method of initial rates using the following equation:
NH4 1aq2  NO2 1aq2 ¡ N2 1g2  2H2O1l2
Table 12.4 gives initial rates obtained from three experiments involving different initial
concentrations of reactants. The general form of the rate law for this reaction is
Rate  

¢ 3NH4 4
 k3NH4 4 n 3NO2 4 m
¢t

We can determine the values of n and m by observing how the initial rate depends on the
initial concentrations of NH4 and NO2. In Experiments 1 and 2, where the initial

536

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

TABLE 12.4 Initial Rates from Three Experiments for the Reaction
NH4 (aq)  NO2 (aq) S N2 ( g)  2H2O(l)

Experiment

Initial
Concentration
of NH4

Initial
Concentration
of NH2

Initial
Rate (mol/L  s)

1
2
3

0.100 M
0.100 M
0.200 M

0.0050 M
0.010 M
0.010 M

1.35  107
2.70  107
5.40  107

concentration of NH4 remains the same but the initial concentration of NO2 doubles, the
observed initial rate also doubles. Since
Rate  k3NH4 4 n 3NO2 4 m
we have for Experiment 1
Rate  1.35  107 mol/L  s  k10.100 mol/L2 n 10.0050 mol/L2 m
and for Experiment 2
Rate  2.70  107 mol/L  s  k10.100 mol/L2 n 10.010 mol/L2 m
The ratio of these rates is

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

k10.100 mol/L2 n 10.010 mol/L2 m
Rate 2
2.70  107 mol/L  s


Rate 1
k10.100 mol/L2 n 10.0050 mol/L2 m
1.35  107 mol/L  s
2.00



Rates 1, 2, and 3 were determined at the
same value of t (very close to t  0).

Thus

10.010 mol/L2 m
 12.02 m
10.0050 mol/L2 m
Rate 2
 2.00  12.02 m
Rate 1

which means the value of m is 1. The rate law for this reaction is ﬁrst order in the reactant NO2.
A similar analysis of the results for Experiments 2 and 3 yields the ratio
10.200 mol/L2 n
Rate 3
5.40  107 mol/L  s


7
Rate 2
10.100 mol/L2 n
2.70  10 mol/L  s
 2.00  a

0.200 n
b  12.002 n
0.100

The value of n is also 1.
We have shown that the values of n and m are both 1 and the rate law is
Rate  k3NH4 4 3NO2 4

Overall reaction order is the sum of the
orders for the various reactants.

This rate law is ﬁrst order in both NO2 and NH4. Note that it is merely a coincidence
that n and m have the same values as the coefﬁcients of NH4 and NO2 in the balanced
equation for the reaction.
The overall reaction order is the sum of n and m. For this reaction, n  m  2. The
reaction is second order overall.

12.3 Determining the Form of the Rate Law

537

The value of the rate constant k can now be calculated using the results of any of the
three experiments shown in Table 12.4. From the data for Experiment 1, we know that
Rate  k3NH4 4 3NO2 4
1.35  107 mol/L  s  k10.100 mol/L210.0050 mol/L2
Then
k

Sample Exercise 12.1

1.35  107 mol/L  s
 2.7  104 L/mol  s
10.100 mol/L210.0050 mol/L2

Determining a Rate Law
The reaction between bromate ions and bromide ions in acidic aqueous solution is given
by the equation
BrO31aq2  5Br1aq2  6H1aq2 ¡ 3Br21l2  3H2O1l2
Table 12.5 gives the results from four experiments. Using these data, determine the orders for all three reactants, the overall reaction order, and the value of the rate constant.
Solution
The general form of the rate law for this reaction is
Rate  k3BrO3 4 n 3Br 4 m 3H 4 p
We can determine the values of n, m, and p by comparing the rates from the various experiments. To determine the value of n, we use the results from Experiments 1 and 2, in
which only [BrO3] changes:
Rate 2 1.6  103 mol/L  s k10.20 mol/L2 n 10.10 mol/L2 m 10.10 mol/L2 p


Rate 1 8.0  104 mol/L  s k10.10 mol/L2 n 10.10 mol/L2 m 10.10 mol/L2 p
0.20 mol/L n
2.0  a
b  12.02 n
0.10 mol/L

Thus n is equal to 1.
To determine the value of m, we use the results from Experiments 2 and 3, in which
only [Br] changes:
Rate 3 3.2  103 mol/L  s k10.20 mol/L2 n 10.20 mol/L2 m 10.10 mol/L2 p


Rate 2 1.6  103 mol/L  s k10.20 mol/L2 n 10.10 mol/L2 m 10.10 mol/L2 p
0.20 mol/L m
2.0  a
b  12.02 m
0.10 mol/L

Thus m is equal to 1.
TABLE 12.5 The Results from Four Experiments to Study the Reaction
BrO3 (aq)  5Br (aq)  6H (aq) S 3Br2 (l )  3H2O(l )

Experiment

Initial
Concentration
of BrO3
(mol/L)

Initial
Concentration
of Br 
(mol/L)

Initial
Concentration
of H 
(mol/L)

Measured
Initial
Rate
(mol/L  s)

1
2
3
4

0.10
0.20
0.20
0.10

0.10
0.10
0.20
0.10

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.20

8.0  104
1.6  103
3.2  103
3.2  103

538

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics
To determine the value of p, we use the results from Experiments 1 and 4, in which
[BrO3] and [Br] are constant but [H ] differs:
Rate 4 3.2  103 mol/L  s k10.10 mol/L2 n 10.10 mol/L2 m 10.20 mol/L2 p


Rate 1 8.0  104 mol/L  s k10.10 mol/L2 n 10.10 mol/L2 m 10.10 mol/L2 p
0.20 mol/L p
4.0  a
b
0.10 mol/L
4.0  12.02 p  12.02 2
Thus p is equal to 2.
The rate of this reaction is ﬁrst order in BrO3 and Br and second order in H  . The
overall reaction order is n  m  p  4.
The rate law can now be written
Rate  k 3BrO3 4 3Br 4 3 H 4 2
The value of the rate constant k can be calculated from the results of any of the four experiments. For Experiment 1, the initial rate is 8.0  104 mol/L  s and [BrO3] 
0.100 M, [Br ]  0.10 M, and [H ]  0.10 M. Using these values in the rate law gives
8.0  104 mol/L  s  k10.10 mol/L210.10 mol/L210.10 mol/L22
8.0  104 mol/L  s  k11.0  104 mol4/L4 2
8.0  104 mol/L  s
k
 8.0 L3/mol3  s
1.0  104 mol4/L4
Reality Check: Verify that the same value of k can be obtained from the results of the
other experiments.
See Exercises 12.25 through 12.28.

12.4

The Integrated Rate Law

The rate laws we have considered so far express the rate as a function of the reactant concentrations. It is also useful to be able to express the reactant concentrations as a function of time, given the (differential) rate law for the reaction. In this section we show how
this is done.
We will proceed by ﬁrst looking at reactions involving a single reactant:
aA ¡ products
all of which have a rate law of the form
Rate  

¢ 3A4
 k3A4 n
¢t

We will develop the integrated rate laws individually for the cases n  1 (ﬁrst order),
n  2 (second order), and n  0 (zero order).

First-Order Rate Laws
For the reaction
2N2O5 1soln2 ¡ 4NO2 1soln2  O2 1g2

12.4 The Integrated Rate Law

539

we have found that the rate law is
Rate  

¢ 3N2O5 4
 k3N2O5 4
¢t

Since the rate of this reaction depends on the concentration of N2O5 to the ﬁrst power, it
is a ﬁrst-order reaction. This means that if the concentration of N2O5 in a ﬂask were
suddenly doubled, the rate of production of NO2 and O2 also would double. This rate law
can be put into a different form using a calculus operation known as integration, which
yields the expression
ln3N2O5 4  kt  ln3N2O5 4 0
Appendix 1.2 contains a review of
logarithms.

where ln indicates the natural logarithm, t is the time, [N2O5 ] is the concentration of N2O5
at time t, and [N2O5 ] 0 is the initial concentration of N2O5 (at t  0, the start of the
experiment). Note that such an equation, called the integrated rate law, expresses the
concentration of the reactant as a function of time.
For a chemical reaction of the form
aA ¡ products
where the kinetics are ﬁrst order in [A], the rate law is
Rate  

¢ 3A4
 k3A4
¢t

and the integrated ﬁrst-order rate law is
ln 3A4  kt  ln 3A4 0

(12.2)

There are several important things to note about Equation (12.2):
An integrated rate law relates
concentration to reaction time.

1. The equation shows how the concentration of A depends on time. If the initial concentration of A and the rate constant k are known, the concentration of A at any time
can be calculated.
2. Equation (12.2) is of the form y  mx  b, where a plot of y versus x is a straight
line with slope m and intercept b. In Equation (12.2),
y  ln 3A4

For a ﬁrst-order reaction, a plot of ln[A]
versus t is always a straight line.

xt

m  k

b  ln 3A4 0

Thus, for a ﬁrst-order reaction, plotting the natural logarithm of concentration versus
time always gives a straight line. This fact is often used to test whether a reaction is
ﬁrst order. For the reaction
aA ¡ products
the reaction is ﬁrst order in A if a plot of ln[A] versus t is a straight line. Conversely,
if this plot is not a straight line, the reaction is not ﬁrst order in A.
3. This integrated rate law for a ﬁrst-order reaction also can be expressed in terms of a
ratio of [A] and [A]0 as follows:
lna

Sample Exercise 12.2

3A4 0
b  kt
3A4

First-Order Rate Laws I
The decomposition of N2O5 in the gas phase was studied at constant temperature.
2N2O5 1g2 ¡ 4NO2 1g2  O2 1g2

540

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

ln [N2O5]

–2.0

– 4.0

– 6.0

FIGURE 12.4
A plot of ln[N2O5] versus time.

0

100

200
300
Time (s)

ln[N2O5]

Time (s)

2.303
2.649
2.996
3.689
4.382
5.075

0
50
100
200
300
400

400

The following results were collected:

[N2O5] (mol/L)

Time (s)

0.1000
0.0707
0.0500
0.0250
0.0125
0.00625

0
50
100
200
300
400

Using these data, verify that the rate law is ﬁrst order in [N2O5] , and calculate the value
of the rate constant, where the rate  ¢[N2O5 ] ¢t.
Solution
We can verify that the rate law is ﬁrst order in [N2O5 ] by constructing a plot of ln[N2O5]
versus time. The values of ln[N2O5 ] at various times are given in the table above and the
plot of ln[N2O5 ] versus time is shown in Fig. 12.4. The fact that the plot is a straight line
conﬁrms that the reaction is ﬁrst order in N2O5, since it follows the equation ln[N2O5 ] 
kt  ln[N2O5 ] 0.
Since the reaction is ﬁrst order, the slope of the line equals k, where
Slope 

¢1ln 3N2O5 4 2
change in y
¢y


change in x
¢x
¢t

Since the ﬁrst and last points are exactly on the line, we will use these points to calculate the slope:
5.075  12.3032
2.772

 6.93  103 s1
400. s  0 s
400. s
k  1slope2  6.93  103 s1

Slope 

See Exercise 12.31.

Sample Exercise 12.3

First-Order Rate Laws II
Using the data given in Sample Exercise 12.2, calculate [N2O5 ] at 150 s after the start of
the reaction.
Solution
We know from Sample Exercise 12.2 that [N2O5 ]  0.0500 mol/L at 100 s and [N2O5 ] 
0.0250 mol/L at 200 s. Since 150 s is halfway between 100 and 200 s, it is tempting to

12.4 The Integrated Rate Law

541

assume that we can simply use an arithmetic average to obtain [N2O5 ] at that time. This
is incorrect because it is ln[N2O5 ] , not [N2O5 ] , that is directly proportional to t. To calculate
[N2O5 ] after 150 s, we use Equation (12.2):
ln 3N2O5 4  kt  ln 3N2O5 4 0

where t  150. s, k  6.93  103 s1 (as determined in Sample Exercise 12.2), and
[N2O5 ]0  0.1000 mol/L.

The antilog operation means to
exponentiate (see Appendix 1.2).

ln1 3 N2O5 4 2 t150  16.93  103 s1 21150. s2  ln10.1002
 1.040  2.303  3.343
3N2O5 4 t150  antilog13.3432  0.0353 mol/L

Note that this value of [N2O5 ] is not halfway between 0.0500 and 0.0250 mol/L.
See Exercise 12.31.

Half-Life of a First-Order Reaction
Visualization: Half-Life of
Reactions

The time required for a reactant to reach half its original concentration is called the halflife of a reactant and is designated by the symbol t1 2. For example, we can calculate the
half-life of the decomposition reaction discussed in Sample Exercise 12.2. The data plotted in Fig. 12.5 show that the half-life for this reaction is 100 seconds. We can see this
by considering the following numbers:
t (s)

[N2O5](mol/L)
0.100

0

⎧ t  100 s;
⎨
100⎩
⎧
⎨ t  100 s;
200⎩
⎧
⎨ t  100 s;
300⎩

0.0500
0.0250

0.0125

[N2O5]0

3N2O5 4 t100
3N2O5 4 t0



0.050
1

0.100
2

3N2O5 4 t100



0.025
1

0.050
2

3N2O5 4 t200



0.0125
1

0.0250
2

3 N2O5 4 t200
3N2O5 4 t300

0.1000
0.0900

[N2O5] (mol/L)

0.0800
0.0700
0.0600

[N2O5]0
2

[N2O5]0
4

[N2O5]0
8

0.0500
0.0400
0.0300
0.0200
0.0100
50

FIGURE 12.5
A plot of [N2O5] versus time for the decomposition reaction of N2O5.

t1/2

100

150

200

t1/2

250
t1/2

Time (s)

300

350

400

542

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics
Note that it always takes 100 seconds for [N2O5 ] to be halved in this reaction.
A general formula for the half-life of a ﬁrst-order reaction can be derived from the
integrated rate law for the general reaction
aA ¡ products
If the reaction is ﬁrst order in [A],
lna

3A4 0
b  kt
3A4

By deﬁnition, when t  t1 2,

3 A4 0
2

3A4 

Then, for t  t1 2, the integrated rate law becomes
lna

3A4 0
b  kt1 2
3A4 0 2

ln122  kt1 2.
Substituting the value of ln(2) and solving for t1 2 gives
or

t1 2 
For a ﬁrst-order reaction, t1/2 is
independent of the initial concentration.

Sample Exercise 12.4

0.693
k

(12.3)

This is the general equation for the half-life of a ﬁrst-order reaction. Equation (12.3) can
be used to calculate t1 2 if k is known or k if t1 2 is known. Note that for a ﬁrst-order reaction, the half-life does not depend on concentration.

Half-Life for First-Order Reaction
A certain ﬁrst-order reaction has a half-life of 20.0 minutes.
a. Calculate the rate constant for this reaction.
b. How much time is required for this reaction to be 75% complete?
Solution
a. Solving Equation (12.3) for k gives
k

0.693
0.693

 3.47  102 min1
t1 2
20.0 min

b. We use the integrated rate law in the form
lna

3A4 0
b  kt
3A4

If the reaction is 75% complete, 75% of the reactant has been consumed, leaving 25%
in the original form:
3A4
 100%  25%
3A4 0

This means that
3 A4

3A4 0
Then

lna

 0.25 or

3A4 0
1

 4.0
3A4
0.25

3A4 0
3.47  102
b  ln14.02  kt  a
bt
3A4
min

12.4 The Integrated Rate Law

t

and

ln14.02
3.47  102
min

543

 40. min

Thus it takes 40. minutes for this particular reaction to reach 75% completion.
Let’s consider another way of solving this problem using the deﬁnition of halflife. After one half-life the reaction has gone 50% to completion. If the initial concentration were 1.0 mol/L, after one half-life the concentration would be 0.50 mol/L.
One more half-life would produce a concentration of 0.25 mol/L. Comparing 0.25
mol/L with the original 1.0 mol/L shows that 25% of the reactant is left after two halflives. This is a general result. (What percentage of reactant remains after three halflives?) Two half-lives for this reaction is 2(20.0 min), or 40.0 min, which agrees with
the preceding answer.
See Exercises 12.32 and 12.42 through 12.44.

Second-Order Rate Laws
For a general reaction involving a single reactant, that is,
aA ¡ products
that is second order in A, the rate law is
Second order: rate  k [A]2. Doubling
the concentration of A quadruples the
reaction rate; tripling the concentration of
A increases the rate by nine times.

Rate  

¢ 3A4
 k3A4 2
¢t

(12.4)

The integrated second-order rate law has the form
1
1
 kt 
3A4
3A4 0

(12.5)

Note the following characteristics of Equation (12.5):
For second-order reactions, a plot of
1[A] versus t will be linear.

1. A plot of 1[A] versus t will produce a straight line with a slope equal to k.
2. Equation (12.5) shows how [A] depends on time and can be used to calculate [A] at
any time t, provided k and [A]0 are known.
When one half-life of the second-order reaction has elapsed (t  t1 2 ), by deﬁnition,
3A4 

3A4 0
2

Equation (12.5) then becomes
1
1
 kt1 2 
3A4 0
3A4 0
2
2
1

 kt1 2
3A4 0
3A4 0
1
 kt1 2
3A4 0
Solving for t1 2 gives the expression for the half-life of a second-order reaction:
t1 2 

1
k3A4 0

(12.6)

544

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics
Sample Exercise 12.5

Determining Rate Laws
Butadiene reacts to form its dimer according to the equation
2C4H6 1g2 ¡ C8H12 1g2

When two identical molecules combine,
the resulting molecule is called a dimer.

The following data were collected for this reaction at a given temperature:
[C4H6] (molL)

Time (1 s)

0.01000
0.00625
0.00476
0.00370
0.00313
0.00270
0.00241
0.00208

0
1000
1800
2800
3600
4400
5200
6200

a. Is this reaction ﬁrst order or second order?
b. What is the value of the rate constant for the reaction?
c. What is the half-life for the reaction under the conditions of this experiment?
Solution
a. To decide whether the rate law for this reaction is ﬁrst order or second order, we must
see whether the plot of ln[C4H6] versus time is a straight line (ﬁrst order) or the plot
of 1[C4H6] versus time is a straight line (second order). The data necessary to make
these plots are as follows:

t (s)

1
[C4H6]

In[C4H4]

0
1000
1800
2800
3600
4400
5200
6200

100
160
210
270
320
370
415
481

4.605
5.075
5.348
5.599
5.767
5.915
6.028
6.175

The resulting plots are shown in Fig. 12.6. Since the ln[C4H6] versus t plot
[Fig. 12.6(a)] is not a straight line, the reaction is not ﬁrst order. The reaction is, however, second order, as shown by the linearity of the 1[C4H6] versus t plot [Fig. 12.6(b)].
Thus we can now write the rate law for this second-order reaction:
Rate  

¢ 3C4H6 4
 k3C4H6 4 2
¢t

b. For a second-order reaction, a plot of 1[C4H6] versus t produces a straight line of
slope k. In terms of the standard equation for a straight line, y  mx  b, we have
y  1 [C4H6 ] and x  t. Thus the slope of the line can be expressed as follows:

Butadiene (C4H6)

Slope 

¢y

¢x

¢a

1
b
3C4H6 4
¢t

12.4 The Integrated Rate Law

545

400

300

– 5.000
1
[C4H6]

ln [C4H6]

200

100

– 6.000

FIGURE 12.6
(a) A plot of ln[C4H6] versus t. (b) A plot of
1[C4H6] versus t.

0

2000

4000
Time (s)

(a)

6000

0

2000

4000
Time (s)

6000

(b)

Using the points at t  0 and t  6200, we can ﬁnd the rate constant for the reaction:
k  slope 

1481  1002 L/mol
381

L/mol  s  6.14  102 L/mol  s
16200.  02 s
6200.

c. The expression for the half-life of a second-order reaction is
t1 2 

1
k3A4 0

In this case k  6.14  102 L/mol  s (from part b) and [A]0  [C4H6]0  0.01000 M
(the concentration at t  0). Thus
t1 2 

16.14  10

2

1
 1.63  103 s
L/mol  s211.000  102 mol/L2

The initial concentration of C4H6 is halved in 1630 s.
See Exercises 12.33, 12.34, 12.45, and 12.46.

For a second-order reaction, t12 is dependent on [A]0. For a ﬁrst-order reaction,
t12 is independent of [A]0.

It is important to recognize the difference between the half-life for a ﬁrst-order reaction and the half-life for a second-order reaction. For a second-order reaction, t12 depends
on both k and [A]0; for a ﬁrst-order reaction, t12 depends only on k. For a ﬁrst-order reaction, a constant time is required to reduce the concentration of the reactant by half, and
then by half again, and so on, as the reaction proceeds. From Sample Exercise 12.5 we
can see that this is not true for a second-order reaction. For that second-order reaction,
we found that the ﬁrst half-life (the time required to go from [C4H6 ]  0.010 M to
[C4H6 ]  0.0050 M) is 1630 seconds. We can estimate the second half-life from the concentration data as a function of time. Note that to reach 0.0024 M C4H6 (approximately
0.00502) requires 5200 seconds of reaction time. Thus to get from 0.0050 M C4H6 to
0.0024 M C4H6 takes 3570 seconds (5200  1630). The second half-life is much longer
than the ﬁrst. This pattern is characteristic of second-order reactions. In fact, for a secondorder reaction, each successive half-life is double the preceding one (provided the effects

546

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics
of the reverse reaction can be ignored, as we are assuming here). Prove this to yourself
by examining the equation t1 2  1 (k[A] 0 ).

For each successive half-life, [A]0 is
halved. Since t12  1k[A]0, t12
doubles.

Zero-Order Rate Laws
Most reactions involving a single reactant show either ﬁrst-order or second-order kinetics. However, sometimes such a reaction can be a zero-order reaction. The rate law for
a zero-order reaction is
Rate  k 3A4 0  k112  k
A zero-order reaction has a constant rate.

For a zero-order reaction, the rate is constant. It does not change with concentration as it
does for ﬁrst-order or second-order reactions.
The integrated rate law for a zero-order reaction is
3A4  kt  3A4 0

(12.7)

In this case a plot of [A] versus t gives a straight line of slope k, as shown in Fig. 12.7.
The expression for the half-life of a zero-order reaction can be obtained from the integrated rate law. By deﬁnition, [A]  [A]02 when t  t1 2, so
3A4 0
 kt1 2  3A4 0
2
3A4 0
kt1 2 
2k

or
Solving for t1 2 gives

t1 2 

3A4 0
2k

(12.8)

Zero-order reactions are most often encountered when a substance such as a metal
surface or an enzyme is required for the reaction to occur. For example, the decomposition reaction
2N2O1g2 ¡ 2N2 1g2  O2 1g2
occurs on a hot platinum surface. When the platinum surface is completely covered with
N2O molecules, an increase in the concentration of N2O has no effect on the rate, since
only those N2O molecules on the surface can react. Under these conditions, the rate is a
constant because it is controlled by what happens on the platinum surface rather than by
the total concentration of N2O, as illustrated in Fig. 12.8. This reaction also can occur at
high temperatures with no platinum surface present, but under these conditions, it is not
zero order.

[A]

[A]0

Slope =

∆[A] –
= k
∆t

∆[A]

Integrated Rate Laws for Reactions with More Than One Reactant
So far we have considered the integrated rate laws for simple reactions with only one reactant. Special techniques are required to deal with more complicated reactions. Let’s consider the reaction

∆t

BrO31aq2  5Br1aq2  6H1aq2 ¡ 3Br2 1l2  3H2O1l2
0

FIGURE 12.7
A plot of [A] versus t for a zero- order
reaction.

t

From experimental evidence we know that the rate law is
Rate  

¢ 3BrO3 4
¢t

 k3BrO3 4 3Br 4 3H 4 2

12.4 The Integrated Rate Law

FIGURE 12.8
The decomposition reaction 2N2O(g) n
2N2(g)  O2(g) takes place on a platinum
surface. Although [N2O] is twice as great in
(b) as in (a), the rate of decomposition of
N2O is the same in both cases because the
platinum surface can accommodate only a
certain number of molecules. As a result,
this reaction is zero order.

Pt

547

Pt
N2O

(a)

(b)

Suppose we run this reaction under conditions where [BrO3]0  1.0  103 M,
[Br ]0  1.0 M, and [H]0  1.0 M. As the reaction proceeds, [BrO3] decreases significantly, but because the Br ion and H ion concentrations are so large initially, relatively
little of these two reactants is consumed. Thus [Br] and [H] remain approximately
constant. In other words, under the conditions where the Br ion and H ion concentrations are much larger than the BrO3 ion concentration, we can assume that throughout the
reaction


3Br 4  3Br 4 0 and

3H 4  3H 4 0

This means that the rate law can be written
Rate  k 3Br 4 0 3H 4 02 3BrO3 4  k¿ 3BrO3 4
where, since [Br]0 and [H]0 are constant,

k¿  k 3Br 4 0 3H 4 02

The rate law
Rate  k¿ 3BrO3 4
is ﬁrst order. However, since this law was obtained by simplifying a more complicated
one, it is called a pseudo-first-order rate law. Under the conditions of this experiment, a plot of ln[BrO3] versus t will give a straight line where the slope is equal
to k . Since [Br]0 and [H]0 are known, the value of k can be calculated from the
equation
k¿  k3Br 4 0 3H 4 02
which can be rearranged to give
k

k¿
3Br 4 0 3H 4 02

Note that the kinetics of complicated reactions can be studied by observing the behavior of one reactant at a time. If the concentration of one reactant is much smaller than
the concentrations of the others, then the amounts of those reactants present in large concentrations will not change signiﬁcantly and can be regarded as constant. The change in
concentration with time of the reactant present in a relatively small amount can then be
used to determine the order of the reaction in that component. This technique allows us
to determine rate laws for complex reactions.

548

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

12.5

Rate Laws: A Summary

In the last several sections we have developed the following important points:
1. To simplify the rate laws for reactions, we have always assumed that the rate is being studied under conditions where only the forward reaction is important. This produces rate laws that contain only reactant concentrations.
2. There are two types of rate laws.
a. The differential rate law (often called the rate law) shows how the rate depends
on the concentrations. The forms of the rate laws for zero-order, ﬁrst-order, and
second-order kinetics of reactions with single reactants are shown in Table 12.6.
b. The integrated rate law shows how concentration depends on time. The integrated
rate laws corresponding to zero-order, ﬁrst-order, and second- order kinetics of onereactant reactions are given in Table 12.6.
3. Whether we determine the differential rate law or the integrated rate law depends
on the type of data that can be collected conveniently and accurately. Once we have
experimentally determined either type of rate law, we can write the other for a given
reaction.
4. The most common method for experimentally determining the differential rate law is
the method of initial rates. In this method several experiments are run at different initial concentrations and the instantaneous rates are determined for each at the same
value of t (as close to t  0 as possible). The point is to evaluate the rate before the
concentrations change signiﬁcantly from the initial values. From a comparison of the
initial rates and the initial concentrations the dependence of the rate on the concentrations of various reactants can be obtained—that is, the order in each reactant can
be determined.

Visualization: Rate Laws

5. To experimentally determine the integrated rate law for a reaction, concentrations are
measured at various values of t as the reaction proceeds. Then the job is to see which
integrated rate law correctly ﬁts the data. Typically this is done visually by ascertaining which type of plot gives a straight line. A summary for one-reactant reactions
is given in Table 12.6. Once the correct straight-line plot is found, the correct integrated rate law can be chosen and the value of k obtained from the slope. Also, the
(differential) rate law for the reaction can then be written.

TABLE 12.6 Summary of the Kinetics for Reactions of the Type aA S Products That Are Zero, First, or
Second Order in [A]
Order

Rate Law:
Integrated Rate Law:
Plot Needed to Give a Straight Line:
Relationship of Rate Constant
to the Slope of Straight Line:
Half-Life:

Zero

First

Second

Rate  k

Rate  k 3A4

Rate  k3 A4 2

3A 4  kt  3A 4 0

ln3A 4  kt  ln 3A4 0

1
1
 kt 
3A 4
3 A4 0

3 A 4 versus t

ln 3 A4 versus t

1
versus t
3A4

Slope  k
3A4 0
t1 2 
2k

Slope  k

Slope  k

0.693
t1 2 
k

t1 2 

1
k3 A4 0

12.6 Reaction Mechanisms

549

6. The integrated rate law for a reaction that involves several reactants can be treated by
choosing conditions such that the concentration of only one reactant varies in a given
experiment. This is done by having the concentration of one reactant remain small
compared with the concentrations of all the others, causing a rate law such as
Rate  k 3A4 n 3B4 m 3C4 p
to reduce to
Rate  k¿ 3A4 n
where k¿  k[B] 0m[C]0p and [B] 0  [A] 0 and [C] 0  [A] 0. The value of n is obtained
by determining whether a plot of [A] versus t is linear (n  0), a plot of ln[A] versus
t is linear (n  1), or a plot of 1[A] versus t is linear (n  2). The value of k¿ is determined from the slope of the appropriate plot. The values of m, p, and k can be found
by determining the value of k¿ at several different concentrations of B and C.

12.6
Visualization: Oscillating
Reaction

Reaction Mechanisms

Most chemical reactions occur by a series of steps called the reaction mechanism. To
understand a reaction, we must know its mechanism, and one of the main purposes for
studying kinetics is to learn as much as possible about the steps involved in a reaction. In
this section we explore some of the fundamental characteristics of reaction mechanisms.
Consider the reaction between nitrogen dioxide and carbon monoxide:
NO2 1g2  CO1g2 ¡ NO1g2  CO2 1g2
The rate law for this reaction is known from experiment to be
Rate  k3NO2 4 2

A balanced equation does not tell us how
the reactants become products.

As we will see below, this reaction is more complicated than it appears from the balanced
equation. This is quite typical; the balanced equation for a reaction tells us the reactants,
the products, and the stoichiometry but gives no direct information about the reaction
mechanism.
For the reaction between nitrogen dioxide and carbon monoxide, the mechanism is
thought to involve the following steps:
NO2 1g2  NO2 1g2 ¡ NO3 1g2  NO1g2
k2
NO3 1g2  CO1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  CO2 1g2
k1

An intermediate is formed in one step
and used up in a subsequent step and so
is never seen as a product.

where k1 and k2 are the rate constants of the individual reactions. In this mechanism,
gaseous NO3 is an intermediate, a species that is neither a reactant nor a product but that
is formed and consumed during the reaction sequence. This reaction is illustrated in
Fig. 12.9.

Step 1

+

+

+

+

Step 2

FIGURE 12.9
A molecular representation of the elementary steps in the reaction of NO2 and CO.

550

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

TABLE 12.7

The preﬁx uni- means one, bi- means
two, and ter- means three.

A unimolecular elementary step is always
ﬁrst order, a bimolecular step is always
second order, and so on.

Examples of Elementary Steps

Elementary Step

Molecularity

Rate Law

A S products
A  A S products
12A S products2
A  B S products
A  A  B S products
12A  B S products2
A  B  C S products

Unimolecular
Bimolecular

Rate  k[A]
Rate  k[A] 2

Bimolecular
Termolecular

Rate  k[A][B]
Rate  k[A] 2[B]

Termolecular

Rate  k[A][B][C]

Each of these two reactions is called an elementary step, a reaction whose rate
law can be written from its molecularity. Molecularity is deﬁned as the number of
species that must collide to produce the reaction indicated by that step. A reaction involving one molecule is called a unimolecular step. Reactions involving the collision
of two and three species are termed bimolecular and termolecular, respectively. Termolecular steps are quite rare, because the probability of three molecules colliding simultaneously is very small. Examples of these three types of elementary steps and the
corresponding rate laws are shown in Table 12.7. Note from Table 12.7 that the rate
law for an elementary step follows directly from the molecularity of that step. For example, for a bimolecular step the rate law is always second order, either of the form
k[A] 2 for a step with a single reactant or of the form k[A][B] for a step involving two
reactants.
We can now deﬁne a reaction mechanism more precisely. It is a series of elementary
steps that must satisfy two requirements:
1. The sum of the elementary steps must give the overall balanced equation for the
reaction.
2. The mechanism must agree with the experimentally determined rate law.
To see how these requirements are applied, we will consider the mechanism given
above for the reaction of nitrogen dioxide and carbon monoxide. First, note that the sum
of the two steps gives the overall balanced equation:
NO2 1g2  NO2 1g2
NO3 1g2  CO1g2
NO2 1g2  NO2 1g2  NO3 1g2  CO1g2
Overall reaction: NO2 1g2  CO1g2

A reaction is only as fast as its slowest
step.

¡
¡
¡
¡

NO3 1g2  NO1g2
NO2 1g2  CO2 1g2
NO3 1g2  NO1g2  NO21g2  CO2 1g2
NO1g2  CO2 1g2

The ﬁrst requirement for a correct mechanism is met. To see whether the mechanism meets
the second requirement, we need to introduce a new idea: the rate-determining step.
Multistep reactions often have one step that is much slower than all the others. Reactants
can become products only as fast as they can get through this slowest step. That is, the
overall reaction can be no faster than the slowest, or rate-determining, step in the sequence.
An analogy for this situation is the pouring of water rapidly into a container through a
funnel. The water collects in the container at a rate that is essentially determined by the
size of the funnel opening and not by the rate of pouring.
Which is the rate-determining step in the reaction of nitrogen dioxide and carbon
monoxide? Let’s assume that the ﬁrst step is rate-determining and the second step is
relatively fast:
NO2 1g2  NO2 1g2 ¡ NO3 1g2  ONO1g2
NO3 1g2  CO1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  CO2 1g2

Slow (rate-determining)
Fast

12.6 Reaction Mechanisms

551

What we have really assumed here is that the formation of NO3 occurs much more slowly
than its reaction with CO. The rate of CO2 production is then controlled by the rate of
formation of NO3 in the ﬁrst step. Since this is an elementary step, we can write the rate
law from the molecularity. The bimolecular ﬁrst step has the rate law
Rate of formation of NO3 

¢ 3NO3 4
 k1 3NO2 4 2
¢t

Since the overall reaction rate can be no faster than the slowest step,
Overall rate  k1 3NO2 4 2
Note that this rate law agrees with the experimentally determined rate law given earlier.
The mechanism we assumed above satisﬁes the two requirements stated earlier and may
be the correct mechanism for the reaction.
How does a chemist deduce the mechanism for a given reaction? The rate law is always determined ﬁrst. Then, using chemical intuition and following the two rules given
on the previous page, the chemist constructs possible mechanisms and tries, with further
experiments, to eliminate those that are least likely. A mechanism can never be proved absolutely. We can only say that a mechanism that satisﬁes the two requirements is possibly correct. Deducing mechanisms for chemical reactions can be difﬁcult and requires
skill and experience. We will only touch on this process in this text.
Sample Exercise 12.6

Reaction Mechanisms
The balanced equation for the reaction of the gases nitrogen dioxide and ﬂuorine is
2NO2 1g2  F2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2F1g2
The experimentally determined rate law is
Rate  k3NO2 4 3 F2 4
A suggested mechanism for this reaction is

+
+

+

k1

NO2  F2 ¡ NO2F  F
k2
F  NO2 ¡ NO2F

Slow
Fast

Is this an acceptable mechanism? That is, does it satisfy the two requirements?
Solution
The ﬁrst requirement for an acceptable mechanism is that the sum of the steps should give
the balanced equation:
NO2  F2
F  NO2
2NO2  F2  F
Overall reaction:
2NO2  F2

¡
¡
¡
¡

NO2F  F
NO2F
2NO2F  F
2NO2F

The ﬁrst requirement is met.
The second requirement is that the mechanism must agree with the experimentally
determined rate law. Since the proposed mechanism states that the ﬁrst step is ratedetermining, the overall reaction rate must be that of the ﬁrst step. The ﬁrst step is
bimolecular, so the rate law is
Rate  k1 3NO2 4 3 F2 4

552

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics
This has the same form as the experimentally determined rate law. The proposed mechanism is acceptable because it satisﬁes both requirements. (Note that we have not proved
that it is the correct mechanism.)
See Exercises 12.51 and 12.52.
Although the mechanism given in Sample Exercise 12.6 has the correct stoichiometry and ﬁts the observed rate law, other mechanisms may also satisfy these requirements.
For example, the mechanism might be
NO2  F2
NO2  O
NOF2  NO2
NO3  NOF

¡
¡
¡
¡

NOF2  O
NO3
NO2F  NOF
NO2F  NO2

Slow
Fast
Fast
Fast

To decide on the most probable mechanism for the reaction, the chemist doing the study
would have to perform additional experiments.

12.7

A Model for Chemical Kinetics

How do chemical reactions occur? We already have given some indications. For example,
we have seen that the rates of chemical reactions depend on the concentrations of the reacting species. The initial rate for the reaction
aA  bB ¡ products
can be described by the rate law
Rate  k3 A4 n 3B4 m

k

T (K)

FIGURE 12.10
A plot showing the exponential dependence
of the rate constant on absolute temperature. The exact temperature dependence of
k is different for each reaction. This plot
represents the behavior of a rate constant
that doubles for every increase in temperature of 10 K.

where the order of each reactant depends on the detailed reaction mechanism. This
explains why reaction rates depend on concentration. But what about some of the other
factors affecting reaction rates? For example, how does temperature affect the speed of
a reaction?
We can answer this question qualitatively from our experience. We have refrigerators
because food spoilage is retarded at low temperatures. The combustion of wood occurs at
a measurable rate only at high temperatures. An egg cooks in boiling water much faster
at sea level than in Leadville, Colorado (elevation 10,000 ft), where the boiling point of
water is approximately 90°C. These observations and others lead us to conclude that chemical reactions speed up when the temperature is increased. Experiments have shown that
virtually all rate constants show an exponential increase with absolute temperature, as represented in Fig. 12.10.
In this section we discuss a model used to account for the observed characteristics of reaction rates. This model, called the collision model, is built around the central
idea that molecules must collide to react. We have already seen how this assumption
explains the concentration dependence of reaction rates. Now we need to consider
whether this model can account for the observed temperature dependence of reaction
rates.
The kinetic molecular theory of gases predicts that an increase in temperature raises
molecular velocities and so increases the frequency of collisions between molecules. This
idea agrees with the observation that reaction rates are greater at higher temperatures.
Thus there is qualitative agreement between the collision model and experimental observations. However, it is found that the rate of reaction is much smaller than the calculated
collision frequency in a collection of gas particles. This must mean that only a small fraction of the collisions produces a reaction. Why?

12.7 A Model for Chemical Kinetics

553

....

Potential energy

....

....

ON....Br
.. (transition state)
ON....Br

Ea

2BrNO
(reactant)

2NO + Br2

∆E

(products)
Reaction progress
(a)

(b)

FIGURE 12.11
(a) The change in potential energy as a function of reaction progress for the reaction 2BrNO n 2NO  Br2. The activation energy Ea represents
the energy needed to disrupt the BrNO molecules so that they can form products. The quantity E represents the net change in energy in going
from reactant to products. (b) A molecular representation of the reaction.

This question was ﬁrst addressed in the 1880s by Svante Arrhenius. He proposed the
existence of a threshold energy, called the activation energy, that must be overcome to
produce a chemical reaction. Such a proposal makes sense, as we can see by considering
the decomposition of BrNO in the gas phase:
2BrNO1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2  Br2 1g2

Visualization: Transition States
and Activation Energy

The higher the activation energy,
the slower the reaction at a given
temperature.

In this reaction two Br¬N bonds must be broken and one Br¬Br bond must be formed.
Breaking a Br¬N bond requires considerable energy (243 kJ/mol), which must come
from somewhere. The collision model postulates that the energy comes from the kinetic
energies possessed by the reacting molecules before the collision. This kinetic energy is
changed into potential energy as the molecules are distorted during a collision to break
bonds and rearrange the atoms into the product molecules.
We can envision the reaction progress as shown in Fig. 12.11. The arrangement of
atoms found at the top of the potential energy “hill,” or barrier, is called the activated
complex, or transition state. The conversion of BrNO to NO and Br2 is exothermic, as
indicated by the fact that the products have lower potential energy than the reactant. However, ¢E has no effect on the rate of the reaction. Rather, the rate depends on the size of
the activation energy Ea.
The main point here is that a certain minimum energy is required for two BrNO molecules to “get over the hill” so that products can form. This energy is furnished by the
energy of the collision. A collision between two BrNO molecules with small kinetic
energies will not have enough energy to get over the barrier. At a given temperature only
a certain fraction of the collisions possesses enough energy to be effective (to result in
product formation).
We can be more precise by recalling from Chapter 5 that a distribution of velocities
exists in a sample of gas molecules. Therefore, a distribution of collision energies also
exists, as shown in Fig. 12.12 for two different temperatures. Figure 12.12 also shows
the activation energy for the reaction in question. Only collisions with energy greater than

Number of collisions

554

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

T1
T 2 > T1
T2

0

0

the activation energy are able to react (get over the barrier). At the lower temperature, T1,
the fraction of effective collisions is quite small. However, as the temperature is increased
to T2, the fraction of collisions with the required activation energy increases dramatically.
When the temperature is doubled, the fraction of effective collisions much more than doubles. In fact, the fraction of effective collisions increases exponentially with temperature.
This is encouraging for our theory; remember that rates of reactions are observed to increase exponentially with temperature. Arrhenius postulated that the number of collisions
having an energy greater than or equal to the activation energy is given by the expression:
Number of collisions with the activation energy  1total number of collisions2eEa

Ea
Energy

FIGURE 12.12
Plot showing the number of collisions
with a particular energy at T1 and T2,
where T2  T1.

RT

where Ea is the activation energy, R is the universal gas constant, and T is the Kelvin temperature. The factor eEa RT represents the fraction of collisions with energy Ea or greater
at temperature T.
We have seen that not all molecular collisions are effective in producing chemical reactions because a minimum energy is required for the reaction to occur. There is, however, another complication. Experiments show that the observed reaction rate is considerably smaller than the rate of collisions with enough energy to surmount the barrier. This
means that many collisions, even though they have the required energy, still do not produce a reaction. Why not?
The answer lies in the molecular orientations during collisions. We can illustrate
this using the reaction between two BrNO molecules, as shown in Fig. 12.13. Some collision orientations can lead to reaction, and others cannot. Therefore, we must include a
correction factor to allow for collisions with nonproductive molecular orientations.
To summarize, two requirements must be satisﬁed for reactants to collide successfully (to rearrange to form products):
1. The collision must involve enough energy to produce the reaction; that is, the collision energy must equal or exceed the activation energy.
2. The relative orientation of the reactants must allow formation of any new bonds necessary to produce products.
Taking these factors into account, we can represent the rate constant as
k  zpeEa RT

O
N

Visualization: The Gas Phase
Reaction of NO and Cl2

O
N

O
N

Br

Br

O
N

Br

Br

Br

Br

(a)
O N

Br

Br

N O

O N

Br

N O

O N

Br

Br

N O

(b)

FIGURE 12.13
Several possible orientations for a collision
between two BrNO molecules. Orientations
(a) and (b) can lead to a reaction, but orientation (c) cannot.

(c)

N O

O N
No reaction

Br

555

12.7 A Model for Chemical Kinetics

where z is the collision frequency, p is called the steric factor (always less than 1) and
reﬂects the fraction of collisions with effective orientations, and eEa RT represents the fraction of collisions with sufﬁcient energy to produce a reaction. This expression is most often written in form
k  AeE a

RT

(12.9)

which is called the Arrhenius equation. In this equation, A replaces zp and is called the
frequency factor for the reaction.
Taking the natural logarithm of each side of the Arrhenius equation gives
ln1k2  

A snowy tree cricket. The frequency of a
cricket’s chirps depends on the temperature
of the cricket.

Sample Exercise 12.7

Ea 1
a b  ln1A2
R T

(12.10)

Equation (12.10) is a linear equation of the type y  mx  b, where y  ln(k),
m  Ea R  slope, x  1 T, and b  ln(A)  intercept. Thus, for a reaction where the
rate constant obeys the Arrhenius equation, a plot of ln(k) versus 1T gives a straight line.
The slope and intercept can be used to determine, respectively, the values of Ea and A
characteristic of that reaction. The fact that most rate constants obey the Arrhenius equation to a good approximation indicates that the collision model for chemical reactions is
physically reasonable.

Determining Activation Energy I
The reaction
2N2O5 1g2 ¡ 4NO2 1g2  O2 1g2
was studied at several temperatures, and the following values of k were obtained:

k (s1)

T (C)

5

2.0  10
7.3  105
2.7  104
9.1  104
2.9  103

20
30
40
50
60

Calculate the value of Ea for this reaction.
Solution
To obtain the value of Ea, we need to construct a plot of ln(k) versus 1T. First, we must
calculate values of ln(k) and 1T, as shown below:

T (C)
20
30
40
50
60

T (K)
293
303
313
323
333

k (s1)

1/T (K)
3.41 
3.30 
3.19 
3.10 
3.00 

3

10
103
103
103
103

ln(k)
5

2.0  10
7.3  105
2.7  104
9.1  104
2.9  103

10.82
9.53
8.22
7.00
5.84

556

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

– 6.00

Slope =
–7.00

∆ ln(k)
∆(1/ T )
10 4 K

= –1.2

∆ ln(k)

ln(k)

– 8.00

– 9.00

–10.00

FIGURE 12.14
Plot of ln(k) versus 1 T for the reaction
2N2O5(g) S 4NO2(g)  O2(g). The value of
the activation energy for this reaction can
be obtained from the slope of the line,
which equals EaR.

∆(1/ T)

–11.00

3.00
10 – 3

3.25
10 –3

3.50
10 –3

1/ T (K)

The plot of ln(k) versus 1T is shown in Fig. 12.14, where the slope
¢ln1k2
1
¢a b
T
is found to be 1.2  104 K. The value of Ea can be determined by solving the following equation:
Ea
R
Ea  R1slope2  18.3145 J/K  mol211.2  104 K2

Slope  

 1.0  10 5 J/mol
Thus the value of the activation energy for this reaction is 1.0  105 J/mol.
See Exercises 12.57 and 12.58.

The most common procedure for ﬁnding Ea for a reaction involves measuring the rate
constant k at several temperatures and then plotting ln(k) versus 1T, as shown in Sample Exercise 12.7. However, Ea also can be calculated from the values of k at only two
temperatures by using a formula that can be derived as follows from Equation (12.10).
At temperature T1, where the rate constant is k1,
ln1k1 2  

Ea
 ln1A2
RT1

At temperature T2, where the rate constant is k2,
ln1k2 2  

Ea
 ln1A2
RT2

12.8 Catalysis

557

Subtracting the ﬁrst equation from the second gives
ln 1k2 2  ln1k1 2  c 

Ea
Ea
 ln 1A2 d  c 
 ln1A2 d
RT2
RT1
Ea
Ea


RT2
RT1
Ea 1
k2
1
lna b  a  b
k1
R T1
T2

And

(12.11)

Therefore, the values of k1 and k2 measured at temperatures T1 and T2 can be used to
calculate Ea, as shown in Sample Exercise 12.8.
Sample Exercise 12.8

Determining Activation Energy II
The gas-phase reaction between methane and diatomic sulfur is given by the equation
CH4 1g2  2S2 1g2 ¡ CS2 1g2  2H2S1g2
At 550°C the rate constant for this reaction is 1.1 L/mol  s, and at 625°C the rate constant is 6.4 L/mol  s. Using these values, calculate Ea for this reaction.
Solution
The relevant data are shown in the following table:
k (L mol  s)

T (C)

T (K)

1.1  k1
6.4  k2

550
625

823  T1
898  T2

Substituting these values into Equation (12.11) gives
lna

Ea
1
1
6.4
b
a

b
1.1
8.3145 J/K  mol 823 K 898 K

Solving for Ea gives
18.3145 J/K  mol2lna
Ea 

6.4
b
1.1

a

1
1

b
823 K 898 K
 1.4  105 J/mol
See Exercises 12.59 through 12.62.

12.8

Catalysis

We have seen that the rate of a reaction increases dramatically with temperature. If a particular reaction does not occur fast enough at normal temperatures, we can speed it up by
raising the temperature. However, sometimes this is not feasible. For example, living cells
can survive only in a rather narrow temperature range, and the human body is designed
to operate at an almost constant temperature of 98.6°F. But many of the complicated biochemical reactions keeping us alive would be much too slow at this temperature without
intervention. We exist only because the body contains many substances called enzymes,
which increase the rates of these reactions. In fact, almost every biologically important
reaction is assisted by a speciﬁc enzyme.

558

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

Uncatalyzed
pathway
Energy

Catalyzed
pathway
Products
∆E
Reactants
Reaction progress

FIGURE 12.15
Energy plots for a catalyzed and an uncatalyzed pathway for a given reaction.

Visualization: Heterogeneous
Catalysis

Although it is possible to use higher temperatures to speed up commercially important reactions, such as the Haber process for synthesizing ammonia, this is very expensive. In a chemical plant an increase in temperature means signiﬁcantly increased costs
for energy. The use of an appropriate catalyst allows a reaction to proceed rapidly at a
relatively low temperature and can therefore hold down production costs.
A catalyst is a substance that speeds up a reaction without being consumed itself. Just
as virtually all vital biologic reactions are assisted by enzymes (biologic catalysts), almost all
industrial processes also involve the use of catalysts. For example, the production of sulfuric
acid uses vanadium(V) oxide, and the Haber process uses a mixture of iron and iron oxide.
How does a catalyst work? Remember that for each reaction a certain energy barrier
must be surmounted. How can we make a reaction occur faster without raising the temperature to increase the molecular energies? The solution is to provide a new pathway for
the reaction, one with a lower activation energy. This is what a catalyst does, as is shown
in Fig. 12.15. Because the catalyst allows the reaction to occur with a lower activation
energy, a much larger fraction of collisions is effective at a given temperature, and the reaction rate is increased. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 12.16. Note from this diagram
that although a catalyst lowers the activation energy Ea for a reaction, it does not affect
the energy difference ¢E between products and reactants.
Catalysts are classiﬁed as homogeneous or heterogeneous. A homogeneous catalyst
is one that is present in the same phase as the reacting molecules. A heterogeneous catalyst exists in a different phase, usually as a solid.

Heterogeneous Catalysis
Heterogeneous catalysis most often involves gaseous reactants being adsorbed on the
surface of a solid catalyst. Adsorption refers to the collection of one substance on the
surface of another substance; absorption refers to the penetration of one substance into
another. Water is absorbed by a sponge.
An important example of heterogeneous catalysis occurs in the hydrogenation of unsaturated hydrocarbons, compounds composed mainly of carbon and hydrogen with some
carbon–carbon double bonds. Hydrogenation is an important industrial process used to
change unsaturated fats, occurring as oils, to saturated fats (solid shortenings such as
Crisco) in which the C“C bonds have been converted to C¬C bonds through addition
of hydrogen.
A simple example of hydrogenation involves ethylene:

Effective
collisions
(uncatalyzed)

Number of collisions
with a given energy

FIGURE 12.16
Effect of a catalyst on the number of reaction-producing collisions. Because a catalyst
provides a reaction pathway with a lower
activation energy, a much greater fraction
of the collisions is effective for the catalyzed pathway (b) than for the uncatalyzed
pathway (a) (at a given temperature). This
allows reactants to become products at a
much higher rate, even though there is no
temperature increase.

This reaction is quite slow at normal temperatures, mainly because the strong bond in the
hydrogen molecule results in a large activation energy for the reaction. However, the

Number of collisions
with a given energy

These cookies contain partially
hydrogenated vegetable oil.

Ea (catalyzed)
Energy

Ea (uncatalyzed)
(a)

Effective
collisions
(catalyzed)

Energy
(b)

12.8 Catalysis

559

reaction rate can be greatly increased by using a solid catalyst of platinum, palladium, or
nickel. The hydrogen and ethylene adsorb on the catalyst surface, where the reaction
occurs. The main function of the catalyst apparently is to allow formation of metal–
hydrogen interactions that weaken the HOH bonds and facilitate the reaction. The
mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 12.17.
Typically, heterogeneous catalysis involves four steps:
1. Adsorption and activation of the reactants
2. Migration of the adsorbed reactants on the surface
3. Reaction of the adsorbed substances
(a)

Metal surface

4. Escape, or desorption, of the products
Heterogeneous catalysis also occurs in the oxidation of gaseous sulfur dioxide to
gaseous sulfur trioxide. This process is especially interesting because it illustrates both
positive and negative consequences of chemical catalysis.
The negative side is the formation of damaging air pollutants. Recall that sulfur dioxide, a toxic gas with a choking odor, is formed whenever sulfur-containing fuels are burned.
However, it is sulfur trioxide that causes most of the environmental damage, mainly
through the production of acid rain. When sulfur trioxide combines with a droplet of water,
sulfuric acid is formed:

(b)

H2O1l2  SO3 1g2 ¡ H2SO41aq2

(c)

(d)

Carbon
Hydrogen

FIGURE 12.17
Heterogeneous catalysis of the hydrogenation of ethylene. (a) The reactants above
the metal surface. (b) Hydrogen is adsorbed
onto the metal surface, forming metal–
hydrogen bonds and breaking the HOH
bonds. The p bond in ethylene is broken
and metal–carbon bonds are formed during
adsorption. (c) The adsorbed molecules and
atoms migrate toward each other on the
metal surface, forming new COH bonds.
(d) The C atoms in ethane (C2H6) have completely saturated bonding capacities and so
cannot bind strongly to the metal surfaces.
The C2H6 molecule thus escapes.

This sulfuric acid can cause considerable damage to vegetation, buildings and statues, and
ﬁsh populations.
Sulfur dioxide is not rapidly oxidized to sulfur trioxide in clean, dry air. Why, then,
is there a problem? The answer is catalysis. Dust particles and water droplets catalyze the
reaction between SO2 and O2 in the air.
On the positive side, the heterogeneous catalysis of the oxidation of SO2 is used to
advantage in the manufacture of sulfuric acid, where the reaction of O2 and SO2 to form
SO3 is catalyzed by a solid mixture of platinum and vanadium(V) oxide.
Heterogeneous catalysis is also utilized in the catalytic converters in automobile exhaust systems. The exhaust gases, containing compounds such as nitric oxide, carbon
monoxide, and unburned hydrocarbons, are passed through a converter containing beads
of solid catalyst (see Fig. 12.18). The catalyst promotes the conversion of carbon monoxide
to carbon dioxide, hydrocarbons to carbon dioxide and water, and nitric oxide to nitrogen
gas to lessen the environmental impact of the exhaust gases. However, this beneﬁcial catalysis can, unfortunately, be accompanied by the unwanted catalysis of the oxidation of SO2
to SO3, which reacts with the moisture present to form sulfuric acid.
Because of the complex nature of the reactions that take place in the converter, a mixture of catalysts is used. The most effective catalytic materials are transition metal oxides
and noble metals such as palladium and platinum.

Homogeneous Catalysis
A homogeneous catalyst exists in the same phase as the reacting molecules. There are
many examples in both the gas and liquid phases. One such example is the unusual catalytic
behavior of nitric oxide toward ozone. In the troposphere, that part of the atmosphere closest to earth, nitric oxide catalyzes ozone production. However, in the upper atmosphere it
catalyzes the decomposition of ozone. Both these effects are unfortunate environmentally.
In the lower atmosphere, NO is produced in any high-temperature combustion process
where N2 is present. The reaction
N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2

560

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Automobiles: Air Puriﬁers?
utlandish as it may seem, a new scheme has been proposed to turn automobiles into air puriﬁers, devouring
the pollutants ozone and carbon monoxide. Engelhard Corporation, an Iselin, New Jersey, company that specializes in
the manufacture of catalytic converters for automotive exhaust systems, has developed a catalyst that decomposes
ozone to oxygen and converts carbon monoxide to carbon
dioxide. Engelhard proposes to paint the catalyst on auto-

O

Visualization: Homogeneous
Catalysis

mobile radiators and air-conditioner compressors where fans
draw large volumes of air for cooling purposes. The catalyst works well at the warm temperatures present on the
surfaces of these devices. The idea is to let cars destroy pollutants using nothing but the catalyst and waste radiator heat.
It’s an intriguing idea. The residents of Los Angeles
drive nearly 300 million miles every day. At that rate, they
could process a lot of air.

is very slow at normal temperatures because of the very strong N‚N and O“O bonds.
However, at elevated temperatures, such as those found in the internal combustion engines
of automobiles, signiﬁcant quantities of NO form. Some of this NO is converted back to
N2 in the catalytic converter, but signiﬁcant amounts escape into the atmosphere to react
with oxygen:
2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2
In the atmosphere, NO2 can absorb light and decompose as follows:
NO2 1g2 ¬¡ NO1g2  O1g2
Light

The oxygen atom is very reactive and can combine with oxygen molecules to form ozone:
O2 1g2  O1g2 ¡ O3 1g2
Although O2 is represented here as the
oxidizing agent for NO, the actual oxidizing agent is probably some type of peroxide compound produced by reaction of
oxygen with pollutants. The direct reaction of NO and O2 is very slow.

Ozone is a powerful oxidizing agent that can react with other air pollutants to form substances irritating to the eyes and lungs, and is itself very toxic.
In this series of reactions, nitric oxide is acting as a true catalyst because it assists
the production of ozone without being consumed itself. This can be seen by summing the
reactions:
NO1g2  12O2 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2
Light
NO2 1g2 ¬¡ NO1g2  O1g2
O2 1g2  O1g2 ¡ O3 1g2
3
2O2 1g2

Engine

FIGURE 12.18
The exhaust gases from an automobile
engine are passed through a catalytic converter to minimize environmental damage.

¡ O3 1g2

Exhaust gases

CO
NO

Exhaust gases

Catalytic converter

CO2
N2

12.8 Catalysis

561

In the upper atmosphere, the presence of nitric oxide has the opposite effect—the depletion of ozone. The series of reactions involved is
NO1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  O2 1g2
O1g2  NO2 1g2 ¡ NO1g2  O2 1g2
O1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ 2O2 1g2

Nitric oxide is again catalytic, but here its effect is to change O3 to O2. This is a potential problem because O3, which absorbs ultraviolet light, is necessary to protect us from
the harmful effects of this high-energy radiation. That is, we want O3 in the upper atmosphere to block ultraviolet radiation from the sun but not in the lower atmosphere,
where we would have to breathe it and its oxidation products.
The ozone layer is also threatened by Freons, a group of stable, noncorrosive compounds, until recently, used as refrigerants and as propellants in aerosol cans. The most
commonly used substance of this type was Freon-12 (CCl2F2). The chemical inertness of
Freons makes them valuable but also creates a problem, since they remain in the environment a long time. Eventually, they migrate into the upper atmosphere to be decomposed by high-energy light. Among the decomposition products are chlorine atoms:
CCl2F2 1g2 ¬¡ CClF2 1g2  Cl1g2
Light

These chlorine atoms can catalyze the decomposition of ozone:

Freon-12

Ozone

This graphic shows data from the Total
Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) Earth
Probe.

Cl1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ ClO1g2  O2 1g2
O1g2  ClO1g2 ¡ Cl1g2  O2 1g2
O1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ 2O2 1g2

The problem of Freons has been brought into strong focus by the discovery of a mysterious “hole” in the ozone layer in the stratosphere over Antarctica. Studies performed
there to ﬁnd the reason for the hole have found unusually high levels of chlorine monoxide (ClO). This strongly implicates the Freons in the atmosphere as being responsible for
the ozone destruction.
Because they pose environmental problems, Freons have been banned by international
agreement. Substitute compounds are now being used.

562

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Enzymes: Nature’s Catalysts
he most impressive examples of homogeneous catalysis
occur in nature, where the complex reactions necessary
for plant and animal life are made possible by enzymes. Enzymes are large molecules speciﬁcally tailored to facilitate
a given type of reaction. Usually enzymes are proteins, an
important class of biomolecules constructed from ␣-amino
acids that have the general structure

T

R

H
N

C

H

H

O

O

C
H
H
H
H

C

R''

N

H

H

C

O

C

R'

N

H

C

R''

N
H

H

Amino
acid

H
O

O
C

OH

H

O
C

O
Water
molecule

O

C

H
O

H

where R represents any one of 20 different substituents.
These amino acid molecules can be “hooked together” to
form a polymer (a word meaning “many parts”) called a protein. The general structure of a protein can be represented
as follows:

N

C

R'

N

H

H
H
Protein
N

R

H
N
H

Many amino
acid fragments

R'

R''

N

C

C

N

C

C

N

C

H

H

O

H

H

O

H

H

Fragment
from an
amino
acid
with substituent R

H

Fragment
from an
amino
acid
with substituent R'

O

H

New protein

C
O

H

Fragment
from an amino
acid with substituent R''

Since speciﬁc proteins are needed by the human body,
the proteins in food must be broken into their constituent
amino acids, which are then used to construct new proteins
in the body’s cells. The reaction in which a protein is broken down one amino acid at a time is shown in Fig. 12.19.
Note that in this reaction a water molecule reacts with a protein molecule to produce an amino acid and a new protein
containing one less amino acid. Without the enzymes found
in human cells, this reaction would be much too slow to be
useful. One of these enzymes is carboxypeptidase-A, a zinccontaining protein (Fig. 12.20).
Carboxypeptidase-A captures the protein to be acted on
(called the substrate) in a special groove and positions the
substrate so that the end is in the active site, where the catalysis occurs (Fig. 12.21). Note that the Zn2 ion bonds to the
oxygen of the C“O (carbonyl) group. This polarizes the
electron density in the carbonyl group, allowing the neigh-

FIGURE 12.19
The removal of the end amino acid from a protein by reaction with
a molecule of water. The products are an amino acid and a new,
smaller protein.

boring CON bond to be broken much more easily. When
the reaction is completed, the remaining portion of the substrate protein and the newly formed amino acid are released
by the enzyme.
The process just described for carboxypeptidase-A is
characteristic of the behavior of other enzymes. Enzyme
catalysis can be represented by the series of reactions shown
below:
ES ¡ ES
ES ¡ EP
where E represents the enzyme, S represents the substrate,
E  S represents the enzyme–substrate complex, and P represents the products. The enzyme and substrate form a complex, where the reaction occurs. The enzyme then releases
the product and is ready to repeat the process. The most
amazing thing about enzymes is their efﬁciency. Because an
enzyme plays its catalytic role over and over and very
rapidly, only a tiny amount of enzyme is required. This
makes the isolation of enzymes for study quite difﬁcult.

12.8 Catalysis

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 12.20
(a) The structure of the enzyme carboxypeptidase-A, which contains 307 amino acids. The zinc ion is shown above as a black sphere in the
center. (b) Carboxypeptidase-A with a substrate (pink) in place.

OH

CH2
CO–2

CH
HN
Zn2+

FIGURE 12.21
Protein–substrate interaction. The substrate
is shown in black and red, with the red
representing the terminal amino acid. Blue
indicates side chains from the enzyme
that help bind the substrate.

O
H

O
H

–O

HO

C
CHR
NH
C O

C
O

+NH

2

C
NH2

563

564

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

Key Terms

For Review

chemical kinetics

Section 12.1
reaction rate
instantaneous rate

Section 12.2
rate law
rate constant
order
(differential) rate law
integrated rate law

Section 12.3
method of initial rates
initial rate
overall reaction order

Chemical kinetics
䊉 The study of the factors that control the rate (speed) of a chemical reaction
• Rate is deﬁned in terms of the change in concentration of a given reaction
component per unit time
• Kinetic measurements are often made under conditions where the reverse
reaction is insigniﬁcant
䊉 The kinetic and thermodynamic properties of a reaction are not fundamentally related
Rate laws
䊉 Differential rate law: describes the rate as a function of concentration
Rate  

Section 12.4
ﬁrst-order reaction
integrated ﬁrst-order rate law
half-life of a reactant
integrated second-order rate law
zero-order reaction
integrated zero-order rate law
pseudo-ﬁrst-order rate law

䊉

• k is the rate constant
• n is the order; not related to the coefﬁcients in the balanced equation
Integrated rate law: describes the concentration as a function of time
• For a reaction of the type
aA ¡ products
for which

Section 12.6
reaction mechanism
intermediate
elementary step
molecularity
unimolecular step
bimolecular step
termolecular step
rate-determining step

n  0:

n  1:

Rate  k 3A4 n
n  0: 3A4  kt  3A4 0
3A4 0
t1 2 
2k
n  1: ln 3A4  kt  ln 3A4 0
t1 2 

Section 12.7
collision model
activation energy
activated complex (transition state)
molecular orientations
steric factor
Arrhenius equation
frequency factor

Section 12.8
enzyme
catalyst
homogeneous catalyst
heterogeneous catalyst
adsorption

¢ 3A4
 k3A4 n
¢t

n  2:

n  2:

0.693
k

1
1
 kt 
3A4
3A4 0
1
t1 2 
k3A4 0

• The value of k can be determined from the plot of the appropriate function of
[A] versus t
Reaction mechanism
䊉 Series of elementary steps by which an overall reaction occurs
• Elementary step: rate law for the step can be written from the molecularity of
the reaction
䊉 Two requirements for an acceptable mechanism:
• The elementary steps sum to give the correct overall balanced equation
• The mechanism agrees with the experimentally determined rate law
䊉 Simple reactions can have an elementary step that is slower than all of the other
steps; which is called the rate-determining step.
Kinetic models
䊉 The simplest model to account for reaction kinetics is the collision model
• Molecules must collide to react
• The collision kinetic energy furnishes the potential energy needed to enable the
reactants to rearrange to form products

For Review

565

• A certain threshold energy called the activation energy (Ea) is necessary for a reaction to occur
• The relative orientations of the colliding reactants are also a determining factor
in the reaction rate
• This model leads to the Arrhenius equation:
k  AeEa RT
• A depends on the collision frequency and relative orientation of the molecules
• The value of Ea can be found by obtaining the values of k at several temperatures
Catalyst
Speeds up a reaction without being consumed
䊉 Works by providing a lower-energy pathway for the reaction
䊉 Enzymes are biological catalysts
䊉 Catalysts can be classiﬁed as homogeneous or heterogeneous
• Homogeneous: exist in the same phase as the reactants
• Heterogeneous: exist in a different phase than the reactants
䊉

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Deﬁne reaction rate. Distinguish between the initial rate, average rate, and instantaneous rate of a chemical reaction. Which of these rates is usually fastest?
The initial rate is the rate used by convention. Give a possible explanation as
to why.
2. Distinguish between the differential rate law and the integrated rate law. Which
of these is often called just the “rate law”? What is k in a rate law, and what are
orders in a rate law? Explain.
3. One experimental procedure that can be used to determine the rate law of a
reaction is the method of initial rates. What data are gathered in the method
of initial rates, and how are these data manipulated to determine k and the
orders of the species in the rate law? Are the units for k, the rate constant,
the same for all rate laws? Explain. If a reaction is ﬁrst order in A, what
happens to the rate if [A] is tripled? If the initial rate for a reaction increases
by a factor of 16 when [A] is quadrupled, what is the order of n? If a
reaction is third order in A and [A] is doubled, what happens to the initial
rate? If a reaction is zero order, what effect does [A] have on the initial
rate of a reaction?
4. The initial rate for a reaction is equal to the slope of the tangent line at t  0 in
d3A4
a plot of [A] versus time. From calculus, initial rate 
. Therefore, the
dt
d 3A4
differential rate law for a reaction is Rate 
 k3A4 n. Assuming you
dt
have some calculus in your background, derive the zero-, ﬁrst-, and second-order
integrated rate laws using the differential rate law.
5. Consider the zero-, ﬁrst-, and second-order integrated rate laws. If you have concentration versus time data for some species in a reaction, what plots would you
make to “prove” a reaction is either zero, ﬁrst, or second order? How would the
rate constant, k, be determined from such a plot? What does the y-intercept
equal in each plot? When a rate law contains the concentration of two or more
species, how can plots be used to determine k and the orders of the species in
the rate law?
6. Derive expressions for the half-life of zero-, ﬁrst-, and second-order reactions
using the integrated rate law for each order. How does each half-life depend on

566

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

7.

8.

9.

10.

concentration? If the half-life for a reaction is 20. seconds, what would be the
second half-life assuming the reaction is either zero, ﬁrst, or second order?
Deﬁne each of the following.
a. elementary step
b. molecularity
c. reaction mechanism
d. intermediate
e. rate-determining step
What two requirements must be met to call a mechanism plausible? Why say a
“plausible” mechanism instead of the “correct” mechanism? Is it true that most
reactions occur by a one-step mechanism? Explain.
What is the premise underlying the collision model? How is the rate affected by
each of the following?
a. activation energy
b. temperature
c. frequency of collisions
d. orientation of collisions
Sketch a potential energy versus reaction progress plot for an endothermic reaction and for an exothermic reaction. Show ¢E and Ea in both plots. When concentrations and temperatures are equal, would you expect the rate of the forward
reaction to be equal to, greater than, or less than the rate of the reverse reaction
if the reaction is exothermic? Endothermic?
Give the Arrhenius equation. Take the natural log of both sides and place this
equation in the form of a straight-line equation (y  mx  b) . What data would
you need and how would you graph those data to get a linear relationship using
the Arrhenius equation? What does the slope of the straight line equal? What
does the y-intercept equal? What are the units of R in the Arrhenius equation?
Explain how if you know the rate constant value at two different temperatures,
you can determine the activation energy for the reaction.
Why does a catalyst increase the rate of a reaction? What is the difference
between a homogeneous catalyst and a heterogeneous catalyst? Would a given
reaction necessarily have the same rate law for both a catalyzed and an
uncatalyzed pathway? Explain.

Active Learning Questions*
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. Deﬁne stability from both a kinetic and thermodynamic perspective. Give examples to show the differences in these concepts.
2. Describe at least two experiments you could perform to determine
a rate law.
3. Make a graph of [A] versus time for zero-, ﬁrst-, and secondorder reactions. From these graphs, compare successive half-lives.

*In the Questions and the Exercises, the term rate law always refers to
the differential rate law.

4. How does temperature affect k, the rate constant? Explain.
5. Consider the following statements: “In general, the rate of a
chemical reaction increases a bit at ﬁrst because it takes a while
for the reaction to get ‘warmed up.’ After that, however, the rate
of the reaction decreases because its rate is dependent on the
concentrations of the reactants, and these are decreasing.” Indicate everything that is correct in these statements, and indicate
everything that is incorrect. Correct the incorrect statements and
explain.
6. For the reaction A  B S C, explain at least two ways in which
the rate law could be zero order in chemical A.
7. A friend of yours states, “A balanced equation tells us how chemicals interact. Therefore, we can determine the rate law directly
from the balanced equation.” What do you tell your friend?
8. Provide a conceptual rationale for the differences in the half-lives
of zero-, ﬁrst-, and second-order reactions.

Exercises
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

567

20. In the Haber process for the production of ammonia,
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
what is the relationship between the rate of production of ammonia and the rate of consumption of hydrogen?

Questions
9. Deﬁne what is meant by unimolecular and bimolecular steps. Why
are termolecular steps infrequently seen in chemical reactions?
10. Hydrogen reacts explosively with oxygen. However, a mixture of
H2 and O2 can exist indeﬁnitely at room temperature. Explain why
H2 and O2 do not react under these conditions.
11. For the reaction

21. At 40°C, H2O2 (aq) will decompose according to the following
reaction:
2H2O2 1aq2 ¡ 2H2O1l2  O2 1g2
The following data were collected for the concentration of H2O2
at various times.

2H2 1g2  2NO1g2 ¡ N2 1g2  2H2O1g2
the observed rate law is
Rate  k3 NO 4 2 3H2 4

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

Which of the changes listed below would affect the value of the
rate constant k?
a. increasing the partial pressure of hydrogen gas
b. changing the temperature
c. using an appropriate catalyst
The rate law for a reaction can be determined only from experiment
and not from the balanced equation. Two experimental procedures
were outlined in Chapter 12. What are these two procedures? Explain how each method is used to determine rate laws.
Table 12.2 illustrates how the average rate of a reaction decreases
with time. Why does the average rate decrease with time? How
does the instantaneous rate of a reaction depend on time? Why
are initial rates used by convention?
The type of rate law for a reaction, either the differential rate law
or the integrated rate, is usually determined by which data is
easiest to collect. Explain.
The initial rate of a reaction doubles as the concentration of one
of the reactants is quadrupled. What is the order of this reactant?
If a reactant has a 1 order, what happens to the initial rate when
the concentration of that reactant increases by a factor of two?
Reactions that require a metal catalyst are often zero order after
a certain amount of reactant(s) are present. Explain.
The central idea of the collision model is that molecules must collide in order to react. Give two reasons why not all collisions of
reactant molecules result in product formation.
Would the slope of a ln k versus 1/T (K) plot for a catalyzed reaction be more of less negative than the slope of the ln k versus
1/T (K) plot for the uncatalyzed reaction? Explain.

Exercises

Time (s)

[H2O2] (mol/L)

0
2.16  104
4.32  104

1.000
0.500
0.250

a. Calculate the average rate of decomposition of H2O2 between
0 and 2.16  104 s. Use this rate to calculate the average rate
of production of O2 (g) over the same time period.
b. What are these rates for the time period 2.16  104 s to
4.32  104 s?
22. Consider the general reaction
aA  bB ¡ cC
and the following average rate data over some time period ¢t:

4PH3 1g2 ¡ P4 1g2  6H2 1g2
If, in a certain experiment, over a speciﬁc time period, 0.0048 mol
PH3 is consumed in a 2.0-L container each second of reaction,
what are the rates of production of P4 and H2 in this experiment?



¢B
 0.0120 mol/L  s
¢t

Determine a set of possible coefﬁcients to balance this general
reaction.
23. What are the units for each of the following if the concentrations
are expressed in moles per liter and the time in seconds?
a. rate of a chemical reaction
b. rate constant for a zero-order rate law
c. rate constant for a ﬁrst-order rate law
d. rate constant for a second-order rate law
e. rate constant for a third-order rate law
24. The rate law for the reaction
Cl2 1g2  CHCl3 1g2 ¡ HCl1g2  CCl4 1g2
is

19. Consider the reaction

¢A
 0.0080 mol/L  s
¢t

¢C
 0.0160 mol/L  s
¢t

In this section similar exercises are paired.

Reaction Rates



Rate  k 3Cl2 4 1 2 3CHCl3 4

What are the units for k, assuming time in seconds and concentration in mol/L?

Rate Laws from Experimental Data: Initial Rates Method
25. The reaction
2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2NOCl1g2

568

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

was studied at 10°C. The following results were obtained where
Rate  

¢ 3Cl2 4
¢t

c. Calculate the rate constant when concentrations are given in
moles per liter.
28. The following data were obtained for the gas-phase decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide,
2N2O5 1g2 ¡ 4NO2 1g2  O2 1g2

[NO]0 (mol/L)

[Cl2]0 (mol/L)

Initial Rate
(mol/L  min)

0.10
0.10
0.20

0.10
0.20
0.20

0.18
0.36
1.45

a. What is the rate law?
b. What is the value of the rate constant?
26. The reaction
2I 1aq2  S2O82 1aq2 ¡ I2 1aq2  2SO42 1aq2
was studied at 25°C. The following results were obtained where
Rate  

¢ 3S2O82 4
¢t

[I]o
(mol/L)

[S2O82]o
(mol/L)

Initial Rate
(mol/L  s)

0.080
0.040
0.080
0.032
0.060

0.040
0.040
0.020
0.040
0.030

12.5  106
6.25  106
6.25  106
5.00  106
7.00  106

a. Determine the rate law.
b. Calculate a value for the rate constant for each experiment and
an average value for the rate constant.
27. The decomposition of nitrosyl chloride was studied:
2NOCl1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2
The following data were obtained where
Rate  

[NOCl]0
(molecules/cm3)
3.0
2.0
1.0
4.0






¢ 3NOCl 4

[N2O5]0
(mol/L)

Initial Rate
(mol/L  s)

0.0750
0.190
0.275
0.410

8.90  104
2.26  103
3.26  103
4.85  103

Deﬁning the rate as ¢ [N2O5 ] ¢t, write the rate law and
calculate the value of the rate constant.
29. The rate of the reaction between hemoglobin (Hb) and carbon
monoxide (CO) was studied at 20°C. The following data were
collected with all concentration units in ␮mol/L. (A hemoglobin
concentration of 2.21 mmol/L is equal to 2.21  106 mol/L.)

[Hb]0
(␮mol/L)

[CO]0
(␮mol/L)

Initial Rate
(␮mol/L  s)

2.21
4.42
4.42

1.00
1.00
3.00

0.619
1.24
3.71

a. Determine the orders of this reaction with respect to Hb and
CO.
b. Determine the rate law.
c. Calculate the value of the rate constant.
d. What would be the initial rate for an experiment with
[Hb] 0  3.36 mmol/L and [CO] 0  2.40 mmol/L?
30. The following data were obtained for the reaction
2ClO2 1aq2  2OH 1aq2 ¡ ClO3 1aq2  ClO2 1aq2  H2O1l2
where

Rate  

¢t

¢ 3ClO2 4
¢t

Initial Rate
(molecules/cm3  s)

[ClO2]0
(mol/L)

[OH]0
(mol/L)

Initial Rate
(mol/L  s)






0.0500
0.100
0.100

0.100
0.100
0.0500

5.75  102
2.30  101
1.15  101

1016
1016
1016
1016

a. What is the rate law?
b. Calculate the rate constant.

5.98
2.66
6.64
1.06

104
104
103
105

a. Determine the rate law and the value of the rate constant.
b. What would be the initial rate for an experiment with [ClO2] 0 
0.175 mol/L and [OH] 0  0.0844 mol/L?

Exercises

Integrated Rate Laws
31. The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide was studied, and the
following data were obtained at a particular temperature:

569

Determine the rate law, the integrated law, and the value of the
rate constant. Calculate [NO2 ] at 2.70  104 s after the start of
the reaction.
34. A certain reaction has the following general form:
aA ¡ bB

Time (s)

[H2O2] (mol/L)

0
120  1
300  1
600  1
1200  1
1800  1
2400  1
3000  1
3600  1

1.00
0.91
0.78
0.59
0.37
0.22
0.13
0.082
0.050

At a particular temperature and [A] 0  2.80  103 M, concentration versus time data were collected for this reaction, and a plot
of 1[A] versus time resulted in a straight line with a slope value
of 3.60  102 L/mol  s.
a. Determine the rate law, the integrated rate law, and the value
of the rate constant for this reaction.
b. Calculate the half-life for this reaction.
c. How much time is required for the concentration of A to decrease to 7.00  104 M?
35. The decomposition of ethanol (C2H5OH) on an alumina (Al2O3)
surface
C2H5OH1g2 ¡ C2H4 1g2  H2O1g2

Assuming that
Rate  

¢ 3H2O2 4
¢t

determine the rate law, the integrated rate law, and the value of
the rate constant. Calculate [H2O2] at 4000. s after the start of the
reaction.
32. A certain reaction has the following general form:
aA ¡ bB
At a particular temperature and [A] 0  2.00  102 M, concentration versus time data were collected for this reaction, and a plot
of ln[A] versus time resulted in a straight line with a slope value
of 2.97  102 min1.
a. Determine the rate law, the integrated rate law, and the value
of the rate constant for this reaction.
b. Calculate the half-life for this reaction.
c. How much time is required for the concentration of A to decrease to 2.50  103 M ?
33. The rate of the reaction
NO2 1g2  CO1g2 ¡ NO1g2  CO2 1g2
depends only on the concentration of nitrogen dioxide below
225°C. At a temperature below 225°C, the following data were
collected:

Time (s)
0
1.20
3.00
4.50
9.00
1.80







103
103
103
103
104

[NO2] (mol/L)
0.500
0.444
0.381
0.340
0.250
0.174

was studied at 600 K. Concentration versus time data were collected for this reaction, and a plot of [A] versus time resulted in
a straight line with a slope of 4.00  105 mol/L  s.
a. Determine the rate law, the integrated rate law, and the value
of the rate constant for this reaction.
b. If the initial concentration of C2H5OH was 1.25  102 M,
calculate the half-life for this reaction.
c. How much time is required for all the 1.25  102 M C2H5OH
to decompose?
36. At 500 K in the presence of a copper surface, ethanol decomposes
according to the equation
C2H5OH1g2 ¡ CH3CHO1g2  H2 1g2
The pressure of C2H5OH was measured as a function of time and
the following data were obtained:

Time (s)

PC2H5OH (torr)

0
100.
200.
300.
400.
500.

250.
237
224
211
198
185

Since the pressure of a gas is directly proportional to the concentration of gas, we can express the rate law for a gaseous
reaction in terms of partial pressures. Using the above data, deduce the rate law, the integrated rate law, and the value of the rate
constant, all in terms of pressure units in atm and time in seconds.
Predict the pressure of C2H5OH after 900. s from the start of the
reaction. (Hint: To determine the order of the reaction with respect to C2H5OH, compare how the pressure of C2H5OH decreases
with each time listing.)

570

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics
100

37. The dimerization of butadiene
2C4H6 1g2 ¡ C8H12 1g2
1/[A]

80

was studied at 500. K, and the following data were obtained:
Time (s)

1.6
1.5
1.3
1.1
0.68







Assuming that
Rate  

0

102
102
102
102
102

¢ 3 C4H6 4

6

¢t

was studied at a certain temperature.
a. In the ﬁrst set of experiments, NO2 was in large excess, at a
concentration of 1.0  1013 molecules/cm3 with the following
data collected:
[O] (atoms/cm3)
5.0
1.9
6.8
2.5

4

2

What is the order of the reaction with respect to A and what is
the initial concentration of A?
40. Consider the data plotted in Exercise 39 when answering the following questions.
a. What is the concentration of A after 9 s?
b. What are the ﬁrst three half-lives for this experiment?

O1g2  NO2 1g2 ¡ NO1g2  O2 1g2

0
1.0  102
2.0  102
3.0  102

0

Time (s)

determine the form of the rate law, the integrated rate law, and the
rate constant for this reaction. (These are actual experimental data,
so they may not give a perfectly straight line.)
38. The rate of the reaction

Time (s)

40
20

[C4H6] (mol/L)

195
604
1246
2180
6210

60






41. The reaction
A ¡ BC
is known to be zero order in A and to have a rate constant of
5.0  102 mol/L  s at 25°C. An experiment was run at 25°C
where [A] 0  1.0  103 M.
a. Write the integrated rate law for this reaction.
b. Calculate the half-life for the reaction.
c. Calculate the concentration of B after 5.0  103 s has elapsed.
42. The radioactive isotope 32P decays by ﬁrst-order kinetics and has
a half-life of 14.3 days. How long does it take for 95.0% of a
sample of 32P to decay?
43. A ﬁrst-order reaction is 75.0% complete in 320. s.
a. What are the ﬁrst and second half-lives for this reaction?
b. How long does it take for 90.0% completion?
44. The rate law for the decomposition of phosphine (PH3) is

9

10
109
108
108

Rate  
What is the order of the reaction with respect to oxygen atoms?
b. The reaction is known to be ﬁrst order with respect to NO2.
Determine the overall rate law and the value of the rate
constant.

¢ 3 PH3 4
¢t

 k 3PH3 4

It takes 120. s for 1.00 M PH3 to decrease to 0.250 M. How much
time is required for 2.00 M PH3 to decrease to a concentration of
0.350 M?
45. Consider the following initial rate data for the decomposition of
compound AB to give A and B:

39. Experimental data for the reaction
A ¡ 2B  C
have been plotted in the following three different ways (with concentration units in mol/L):
–3.0

0.05

–3.5

0.03

ln[A]

[A]

0.04

0.02

0

0

2

4

Time (s)

6

Initial Rate
(mol/L  s)

0.200
0.400
0.600

3.20  103
1.28  102
2.88  102

–4.0
–4.5

0.01

[AB]0
(mol/L)

–5.0

0

2

4

Time (s)

6

Determine the half-life for the decomposition reaction initially
having 1.00 M AB present.
46. The rate law for the reaction
2NOBr1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2  Br2 1g2

Exercises
at some temperature is
Rate  

¢ 3 NOBr 4
¢t

 k3 NOBr4 2

a. If the half-life for this reaction is 2.00 s when [NOBr]0 
0.900 M, calculate the value of k for this reaction.
b. How much time is required for the concentration of NOBr to
decrease to 0.100 M?
47. For the reaction A S products, successive half-lives are observed
to be 10.0, 20.0, and 40.0 min for an experiment in which
[A] 0  0.10 M. Calculate the concentration of A at the following
times.
a. 80.0 min
b. 30.0 min
48. Consider the hypothetical reaction
A  B  2C ¡ 2D  3E
where the rate law is
Rate  

¢ 3A 4
¢t

571

Write the rate law expected for this mechanism. What is the overall balanced equation for the reaction? What are the intermediates
in the proposed mechanism?
52. The mechanism for the reaction of nitrogen dioxide with carbon
monoxide to form nitric oxide and carbon dioxide is thought to be
NO2  NO2 ¡ NO3  NO
NO3  CO ¡ NO2  CO2

Slow
Fast

Write the rate law expected for this mechanism. What is the overall balanced equation for the reaction?

Temperature Dependence of Rate Constants and the
Collision Model
53. For the following reaction proﬁle, indicate
a. the positions of reactants and products.
b. the activation energy.
c. ¢E for the reaction.

 k3 A 4 3 B 4 2

An experiment is carried out where [A] 0  1.0  102 M,
[B] 0  3.0 M, and [ C] 0  2.0 M. The reaction is started, and
after 8.0 seconds, the concentration of A is 3.8  103 M.
a. Calculate k for this reaction.
b. Calculate the half-life for this experiment.
c. Calculate the concentration of A after 13.0 seconds.
d. Calculate the concentration of C after 13.0 seconds.

E

Reaction coordinate

Reaction Mechanisms
49. Write the rate laws for the following elementary reactions.
a. CH3NC1g2 S CH3CN1g2
b. O3 1g2  NO1g2 S O2 1g2  NO2 1g2
c. O3 1g2 S O2 1g2  O1g2
c. O3 1g2  O1g2 S 2O2 1g2
50. The mechanisms shown below have been proposed to explain the
kinetics of the reaction considered in Question 11. Which of the
following are acceptable mechanisms? Explain.
Mechanism I:
2H2 1g2  2NO1g2 ¡ N2 1g2  2H2O1g2
Mechanism II:
H2 1g2  NO1g2 ¡ H2O1g2  N1g2

Slow

N1g2  NO1g2 ¡ N2 1g2  O1g2

Fast

H2 1g2  O1g2 ¡ H2O1g2

Fast

54. Draw a rough sketch of the energy proﬁle for each of the following cases:
a. ¢E  10 kJ/mol, Ea  25 kJ/mol
b. ¢E  10 kJ/mol, Ea  50 kJ/mol
c. ¢E  50 kJ/mol, Ea  50 kJ/mol
55. The activation energy for the reaction
NO2 1g2  CO1g2 ¡ NO1g2  CO2 1g2
is 125 kJ/mol, and ¢E for the reaction is 216 kJ/mol. What is the
activation energy for the reverse reaction [NO(g)  CO2 (g) ¡
NO2 (g)  CO(g) ]?
56. For a certain process, the activation energy is greater for the forward reaction than for the reverse reaction. Does this reaction have
a positive or negative value for ¢E?
57. The rate constant for the gas-phase decomposition of N2O5,
N2O5 ¡ 2NO2  12 O2

Mechanism III:
H2 1g2  2NO1g2 ¡ N2O1g2  H2O1g2
N2O1g2  H2 1g2 ¡ N2 1g2  H2O1g2

Slow
Fast

51. A proposed mechanism for a reaction is
C4H9Br ¡ C4H9  Br

Slow

C4H9  H2O ¡ C4H9OH2
C4H9OH2

 H2O ¡ C4H9OH  H3O

has the following temperature dependence:

Fast


Fast

T (K)

k (s1)

338
318
298

4.9  103
5.0  104
3.5  105

572

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

Make the appropriate graph using these data, and determine the
activation energy for this reaction.
58. The reaction
1CH3 2 3CBr  OH ¡ 1CH3 2 3COH  Br
in a certain solvent is ﬁrst order with respect to (CH3 ) 3CBr and
zero order with respect to OH. In several experiments, the rate
constant k was determined at different temperatures. A plot of
ln(k) versus 1T was constructed resulting in a straight line with
a slope value of 1.10  104 K and y-intercept of 33.5. Assume
k has units of s1.
a. Determine the activation energy for this reaction.
b. Determine the value of the frequency factor A.
c. Calculate the value of k at 25°C.
59. The activation energy for the decomposition of HI(g) to H2(g) and
I2(g) is 186 kJ/mol. The rate constant at 555 K is 3.52  107
L/mol  s. What is the rate constant at 645 K?
60. A ﬁrst-order reaction has rate constants of 4.6  102 s1 and
8.1  102 s1 at 0°C and 20.°C, respectively. What is the value
of the activation energy?

Catalysts
65. One mechanism for the destruction of ozone in the upper atmosphere is
O3 1g2  NO1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  O2 1g2

NO2 1g2  O1g2 ¡ NO1g2  O2 1g2

Overall reaction O3 1g2  O1g2 ¡ 2O2 1g2

Slow
Fast

a. Which species is a catalyst?
b. Which species is an intermediate?
c. Ea for the uncatalyzed reaction

O3 1g2  O1g2 ¡ 2O2

is 14.0 kJ. Ea for the same reaction when catalyzed is 11.9 kJ.
What is the ratio of the rate constant for the catalyzed reaction to that for the uncatalyzed reaction at 25°C? Assume that
the frequency factor A is the same for each reaction.
66. One of the concerns about the use of Freons is that they will migrate to the upper atmosphere, where chlorine atoms can be generated by the following reaction:
hv

61. A certain reaction has an activation energy of 54.0 kJ/mol. As the
temperature is increased from 22°C to a higher temperature, the
rate constant increases by a factor of 7.00. Calculate the higher
temperature.
62. Chemists commonly use a rule of thumb that an increase of 10 K
in temperature doubles the rate of a reaction. What must the activation energy be for this statement to be true for a temperature
increase from 25 to 35°C?
63. Which of the following reactions would you expect to
proceed at a faster rate at room temperature? Why? (Hint:
Think about which reaction would have the lower activation
energy.)
2Ce4 1aq2  Hg22 1aq2 ¡ 2Ce3 1aq2  2Hg2 1aq2
H3O 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ 2H2O1l2

64. One reason suggested for the instability of long chains of silicon
atoms is that the decomposition involves the transition state shown
below:

The activation energy for such a process is 210 kJ/mol, which is
less than either the SiOSi or the SiOH bond energy. Why would
a similar mechanism not be expected to play a very important role
in the decomposition of long chains of carbon atoms as seen in
organic compounds?

CCl2F2 ¡ CF2Cl  Cl
Freon-12

Chlorine atoms can act as a catalyst for the destruction of ozone.
The activation energy for the reaction
Cl  O3 ¡ ClO  O2
is 2.1 kJ/mol. Which is the more effective catalyst for the destruction of ozone, Cl or NO? (See Exercise 65.)
67. Assuming that the mechanism for the hydrogenation of C2H4 given
in Section 12.8 is correct, would you predict that the product of
the reaction of C2H4 with D2 would be CH2DOCH2D or
CHD2OCH3? How could the reaction of C2H4 with D2 be used to
conﬁrm the mechanism for the hydrogenation of C2H4 given in
Section 12.8?
68. The decomposition of NH3 to N2 and H2 was studied on two
surfaces:

Surface

Ea (kJ/mol)

W
Os

163
197

Without a catalyst, the activation energy is 335 kJ/mol.
a. Which surface is the better heterogeneous catalyst for the
decomposition of NH3? Why?
b. How many times faster is the reaction at 298 K on the W surface compared with the reaction with no catalyst present? Assume that the frequency factor A is the same for each reaction.
c. The decomposition reaction on the two surfaces obeys a rate
law of the form
Rate  k

3NH3 4
3H2 4

Additional Exercises
How can you explain the inverse dependence of the rate on the
H2 concentration?
69. A famous chemical demonstration is the “magic genie” procedure,
in which hydrogen peroxide decomposes to water and oxygen gas
with the aid of a catalyst. The activation energy of this (uncatalyzed) reaction is 70.0 kJ/mol. When the catalyst is added, the
activation energy (at 20.°C) is 42.0 kJ/mol. Theoretically, to what
temperature (°C) would one have to heat the hydrogen peroxide
solution so that the rate of the uncatalyzed reaction is equal to the
rate of the catalyzed reaction at 20.°C? Assume the frequency factor A is constant and assume the initial concentrations are the same.
70. The activation energy for a reaction is changed from 184 kJ/mol
to 59.0 kJ/mol at 600. K by the introduction of a catalyst. If the
uncatalyzed reaction takes about 2400 years to occur, about how
long will the catalyzed reaction take? Assume the frequency factor A is constant and assume the initial concentrations are the same.

Additional Exercises

73. For the reaction
2N2O5 1g2 ¡ 4NO2 1g2  O2 1g2
the following data were collected, where
Rate  

Time (s)
0
100.
300.
600.
900.

¢ 3N2O5 4
¢t

T  338 K
[N2O5]
1.00
6.14
2.33
5.41
1.26







101
102
102
103
103

T  318 K
[N2O5]
M
M
M
M
M

1.00
9.54
8.63
7.43
6.39







101
102
102
102
102

M
M
M
M
M

Calculate Ea for this reaction.
74. Experimental values for the temperature dependence of the rate
constant for the gas-phase reaction

71. The reaction
2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

NO  O3 ¡ NO2  O2

was studied, and the following data were obtained where
Rate  

573

¢ 3O2 4

are as follows:

¢t
T (K)

[NO]0
(molecules/cm3)

[O2]0
(molecules/cm3)

Initial Rate
(molecules/cm3  s)

1.00  1018
3.00  1018
2.50  1018

1.00  1018
1.00  1018
2.50  1018

2.00  1016
1.80  1017
3.13  1017

What would be the initial rate for an experiment where
[NO]0  6.21  1018 molecules/cm3 and [O2]0  7.36  1018
molecules/cm3?
72. Sulfuryl chloride (SO2Cl2) decomposes to sulfur dioxide (SO2)
and chlorine (Cl2) by reaction in the gas phase. The following
pressure data were obtained when a sample containing 5.00  102
mol sulfuryl chloride was heated to 600. K in a 5.00  101L container.

0.00

1.00

2.00

4.00

8.00

16.00

PSO2Cl2 (atm):

4.93

4.26

3.52

2.53

1.30

0.34

1.08
2.95
5.42
12.0
35.5







109
109
109
109
109

Make the appropriate graph using these data, and determine the
activation energy for this reaction.
75. For enzyme-catalyzed reactions that follow the mechanism
ES ∆ ES
ES ∆ EP
a graph of the rate as a function of [S], the concentration of the
substrate, has the following appearance:

Rate

Time (hours):

195
230.
260.
298
369

k (L/mol  s)

Deﬁning the rate as 

¢ 3 SO2Cl2 4
¢t

,

a. determine the value of the rate constant for the decomposition
of sulfuryl chloride at 600. K.
b. what is the half-life of the reaction?
c. what fraction of the sulfuryl chloride remains after 20.0 h?

[S]

Note that at higher substrate concentrations the rate no longer
changes with [S]. Suggest a reason for this.

574

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

76. The activation energy of a certain uncatalyzed biochemical reaction is 50.0 kJ/mol. In the presence of a catalyst at 37°C, the
rate constant for the reaction increases by a factor of 2.50  103
as compared with the uncatalyzed reaction. Assuming the frequency factor A is the same for both the catalyzed and uncatalyzed reactions, calculate the activation energy for the catalyzed
reaction.
77. Consider the reaction

Both processes are known to be second order in reactant, and k1
is known to be 0.250 L/mol  s at 25°C. In a particular experiment A and B were placed in separate containers at 25°C, where
[A] 0  1.00  102 M and [B] 0  2.50  102 M . It was found
that after each reaction had progressed for 3.00 min, [A] 
3.00[B] . In this case the rate laws are deﬁned as
Rate  

3A  B  C S D  E

Rate  

where the rate law is deﬁned as


¢ 3A4
¢t

 k3 A 4 2 3B 4 3 C 4

An experiment is carried out where [B] 0  [C] 0  1.00 M and
[A] 0  1.00  104 M.
a. If after 3.00 min, [A]  3.26  105 M, calculate the value
of k.
b. Calculate the half-life for this experiment.
c. Calculate the concentration of B and the concentration of A
after 10.0 min.

Challenge Problems
78. Consider a reaction of the type aA S products, in which the rate
law is found to be rate  k[A] 3 (termolecular reactions are improbable but possible). If the ﬁrst half-life of the reaction is found
to be 40. s, what is the time for the second half-life? Hint: Using
your calculus knowledge, derive the integrated rate law from the
differential rate law for a termolecular reaction:
Rate 

d3A 4
dt

¢ 3A 4

 k3 A 4 3

79. A study was made of the effect of the hydroxide concentration on
the rate of the reaction
I 1aq2  OCl 1aq2 ¡ IO 1aq2  Cl 1aq2

¢t

¢ 3B 4
¢t

 k1 3A 4 2
 k2 3B 4 2

a. Calculate the concentration of A2 after 3.00 min.
b. Calculate the value of k2.
c. Calculate the half-life for the experiment involving A.
81. The reaction
NO1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  O2 1g2
was studied by performing two experiments. In the ﬁrst
experiment the rate of disappearance of NO was followed in
the presence of a large excess of O3. The results were as
follows ([O3] remains effectively constant at 1.0  1014
molecules/cm3):

Time
(ms)
0
100
500
700
1000






[NO]
(molecules/cm3)
1
1
1
1

6.0
5.0
2.4
1.7
9.9







108
108
108
108
107

In the second experiment [NO] was held constant at 2.0  1014
molecules/cm3. The data for the disappearance of O3 are as
follows:

The following data were obtained:
[I]0
(mol/L)

[OCl]0
(mol/L)

[OH]0
(mol/L)

0.0013
0.0026
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013

0.012
0.012
0.0060
0.018
0.012
0.012
0.018

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.050
0.20
0.20

Initial Rate
(mol/L  s)
9.4
18.7
4.7
14.0
18.7
4.7
7.0









103
103
103
103
103
103
103

Determine the rate law and the value of the rate constant for this
reaction.
80. Two isomers (A and B) of a given compound dimerize as follows:

Time
(ms)
0
50
100
200
300






[O3]
(molecules/cm3)
1
1
1
1

1.0  1010
8.4  109
7.0  109
4.9  109
3.4  109

a. What is the order with respect to each reactant?
b. What is the overall rate law?
c. What is the value of the rate constant from each set of experiments?
Rate  k¿ 3NO 4 x

Rate  k– 3 O3 4 y

k1

d. What is the value of the rate constant for the overall rate law?

k2

Rate  k 3NO 4 x 3O3 4 y

2A ¡ A2
2B ¡ B2

Challenge Problems
82. Most reactions occur by a series of steps. The energy proﬁle for
a certain reaction that proceeds by a two-step mechanism is

575

In experiment 1, [B] 0  5.0 M.
In experiment 2, [B] 0  10.0 M.
Rate 

¢ 3A4
¢t

a. Why is [B] much greater than [A]?
b. Give the rate law and value for k for this reaction.
86. The following data were collected in two studies of the
reaction

E

2H2 1g2  2NO1g2 ¡ N2 1g2  2H2O1g2

Reaction coordinate

On the energy proﬁle, indicate
a. The positions of reactants and products.
b. The activation energy for the overall reaction.
c. ¢E for the reaction.
d. Which point on the plot represents the energy of the intermediate in the two-step reaction?
e. Which step in the mechanism for this reaction is rate determining, the ﬁrst or the second step? Explain.
83. Experiments during a recent summer on a number of ﬁreﬂies
(small beetles, Lampyridaes photinus) showed that the average interval between ﬂashes of individual insects was 16.3 s at 21.0°C
and 13.0 s at 27.8°C.
a. What is the apparent activation energy of the reaction that controls the ﬂashing?
b. What would be the average interval between ﬂashes of an individual ﬁreﬂy at 30.0°C?
c. Compare the observed intervals and the one you calculated
in part b to the rule of thumb that the Celsius temperature is
54 minus twice the interval between ﬂashes.
84. The decomposition of NO2(g) occurs by the following bimolecular
elementary reaction:
2NO2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2  O2 1g2
12

The rate constant at 273 K is 2.3  10 L/mol  s, and the activation energy is 111 kJ/mol. How long will it take for the concentration of NO2(g) to decrease from an initial partial pressure
of 2.5 atm to 1.5 atm at 500. K? Assume ideal gas behavior.
85. The following data were collected in two studies of the reaction
2A  B ¡ C  D

Time (s)
0
20.
40.
60.
80.
100.
120.

Experiment 1
[A] (mol/L)  102
10.0
6.67
5.00
4.00
3.33
2.86
2.50

Time (s)

Experiment 1
[H2] (mol/L)

0.
10.
20.
30.
40.

1.0  102
8.4  103
7.1  103
?
5.0  103

10.0
5.00
3.33
2.50
2.00
1.67
1.43

1.0
5.0
2.5
1.3
6.3

 102
 103
 103
 103
 104

In experiment 1, [NO] 0  10.0 M.
In experiment 2, [NO] 0  20.0 M.
Rate 

¢ 3H2 4
¢t

a. Use the concentration versus time data to determine the rate
law for the reaction.
b. Solve for the rate constant (k) for the reaction. Include
units.
c. Calculate the concentration of H2 in experiment 1 at
t  30. s.
87. Consider the hypothetical reaction
A  B  2C ¡ 2D  3E
In a study of this reaction three experiments were run at the same
temperature. The rate is deﬁned as ¢ 3B 4 ¢t.
Experiment 1:
3 A 4 0  2.0 M

[B] (mol/L)

Experiment 2
[A] (mol/L)  102

Experiment 2
[H2] (mol/L)

2.7
1.6
1.1
8.5
6.9
5.8








104
104
104
105
105
105

3B 4 0  1.0  103 M

3 C4 0  1.0 M

Time (s)
1.0  105
2.0  105
3.0  105
4.0  105
5.0  105
6.0  105

Experiment 2:
3A4 0  1.0  102 M

3 B4 0  3.0 M

3 C4 0  1.0 M

576

Chapter Twelve Chemical Kinetics

[A] (mol/L)

Time (s)

8.9  103
7.1  103
5.5  103
3.8  103
2.9  103
2.0  103

1.0
3.0
5.0
8.0
10.0
13.0

c. What reason could there be for the two-term dependence of
the rate on [H  ] ?

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

89. Sulfuryl chloride undergoes ﬁrst-order decomposition at 320.ºC
with a half-life of 8.75 h.
SO2Cl2 1g2 ¡ SO2 1g2  Cl2 1g2

Experiment 3:
3A4 0  10.0 M

3B 4 0  5.0 M

[C] (mol/L)

Time (s)

0.43
0.36
0.29
0.22
0.15
0.08

1.0  102
2.0  102
3.0  102
4.0  102
5.0  102
6.0  102

3 C 4 0  5.0  10

1

M

In 1aq2 ¡ In1s2  In3 1aq2

Write the rate law for this reaction, and calculate the rate constant.
88. Hydrogen peroxide and the iodide ion react in acidic solution as
follows:
H2O2 1aq2  3I 1aq2  2H 1aq2 ¡


What is the value of the rate constant, k, in s1? If the initial
pressure of SO2Cl2 is 791 torr and the decomposition occurs in
a 1.25-L container, how many molecules of SO2Cl2 remain after
12.5 h?
90. Upon dissolving InCl(s) in HCl, In(aq) undergoes a disproportionation reaction according to the following unbalanced
equation:



I3 1aq2

 2H2O1l2

The kinetics of this reaction were studied by following the decay
of the concentration of H2O2 and constructing plots of ln[H2O2 ]
versus time. All the plots were linear and all solutions had
[H2O2 ] 0  8.0  104 mol/L. The slopes of these straight lines
depended on the initial concentrations of I and H  . The results
follow:

[I]0
(mol/L)

[H]0
(mol/L)

Slope
(min1)

0.1000
0.3000
0.4000
0.0750
0.0750
0.0750

0.0400
0.0400
0.0400
0.0200
0.0800
0.1600

0.120
0.360
0.480
0.0760
0.118
0.174

This disproportionation follows ﬁrst-order kinetics with a half-life
of 667 s. What is the concentration of In(aq) after 1.25 h if the
initial solution of In(aq) was prepared by dissolving 2.38 g of
InCl(s) in 5.00  102 mL of dilute HCl? What mass of ln(s) is
formed after 1.25 h?
91. The decomposition of iodoethane in the gas phase proceeds according to the following equation:
C2H5I1g2 ¡ C2H4 1g2  HI1g2
At 660. K, k  7.2  104 s1; at 720. K, k  1.7  102 s1.
What is the rate constant for this ﬁrst-order decomposition at
325ºC? If the initial pressure of iodoethane is 894 torr at 245ºC,
what is the pressure of iodoethane after three half-lives?

Marathon Problem
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

92. Consider the following reaction:
CH3X  Y ¡ CH3Y  X
At 25°C, the following two experiments were run, yielding the
following data:
Experiment 1: [Y] 0  3.0 M

[CH3X] (mol/L)
The rate law for this reaction has the form
Rate 

¢ 3 H2O2 4
¢t

 1k1  k2 3H  4 2 3 I 4 m 3H2O2 4 n

a. Specify the order of this reaction with respect to [H2O2 ] and[I].
b. Calculate the values of the rate constants, k1 and k2.

7.08
4.52
2.23
4.76
8.44
2.75








103
103
103
104
105
105

Time (h)
1.0
1.5
2.3
4.0
5.7
7.0

Marathon Problem
Experiment 2: [Y] 0  4.5 M
[CH3X] (mol/L)
4.50
1.70
4.19
1.11
2.81







103
103
104
104
105

Time (h)
0
1.0
2.5
4.0
5.5

Experiments also were run at 85°C. The value of the rate constant
at 85°C was found to be 7.88  108 (with the time in units of
hours), where [CH3X] 0  1.0  102 M and [Y] 0  3.0 M .

577

a. Determine the rate law and the value of k for this reaction
at 25°C.
b. Determine the half-life at 85°C.
c. Determine Ea for the reaction.
d. Given that the COX bond energy is known to be about 325
kJ/mol, suggest a mechanism that explains the results in parts
a and c.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

13 Chemical Equilibrium
Contents
13.1 The Equilibrium Condition
• The Characteristics of
Chemical Equilibrium
13.2 The Equilibrium Constant
13.3 Equilibrium Expressions
Involving Pressures
13.4 Heterogeneous Equilibria
13.5 Applications of the
Equilibrium Constant
• The Extent of a Reaction
• Reaction Quotient
• Calculating Equilibrium
Pressures and Concentrations
13.6 Solving Equilibrium
Problems
• Treating Systems That Have
Small Equilibrium Constants
13.7 Le Châtelier’s Principle
• The Effect of a Change in
Concentration
• The Effect of a Change in
Pressure
• The Effect of a Change in
Temperature

578

I

n doing stoichiometry calculations we assumed that reactions proceed to completion,
that is, until one of the reactants runs out. Many reactions do proceed essentially to completion. For such reactions it can be assumed that the reactants are quantitatively converted to products and that the amount of limiting reactant that remains is negligible. On
the other hand, there are many chemical reactions that stop far short of completion. An
example is the dimerization of nitrogen dioxide:
NO2 1g2  NO2 1g2 ¡ N2O4 1g2

The reactant, NO2, is a dark brown gas, and the product, N2O4, is a colorless gas. When
NO2 is placed in an evacuated, sealed glass vessel at 25°C, the initial dark brown color
decreases in intensity as it is converted to colorless N2O4. However, even over a long period of time, the contents of the reaction vessel do not become colorless. Instead, the intensity of the brown color eventually becomes constant, which means that the concentration
of NO2 is no longer changing. This is illustrated on the molecular level in Fig. 13.1. This
observation is a clear indication that the reaction has stopped short of completion. In fact,
the system has reached chemical equilibrium, the state where the concentrations of all
reactants and products remain constant with time.
Any chemical reactions carried out in a closed vessel will reach equilibrium. For some
reactions the equilibrium position so favors the products that the reaction appears to
have gone to completion. We say that the equilibrium position for such reactions lies far
to the right (in the direction of the products). For example, when gaseous hydrogen and
oxygen are mixed in stoichiometric quantities and react to form water vapor, the reaction
proceeds essentially to completion. The amounts of the reactants that remain when the
system reaches equilibrium are so tiny as to be negligible. By contrast, some reactions
occur only to a slight extent. For example, when solid CaO is placed in a closed vessel at
25°C, the decomposition to solid Ca and gaseous O2 is virtually undetectable. In cases like
this, the equilibrium position is said to lie far to the left (in the direction of the reactants).
In this chapter we will discuss how and why a chemical system comes to equilibrium
and the characteristics of equilibrium. In particular, we will discuss how to calculate the
concentrations of the reactants and products present for a given system at equilibrium.

13.1
Equilibrium is a dynamic situation.

The Equilibrium Condition

Since no changes occur in the concentrations of reactants or products in a reaction system at equilibrium, it may appear that everything has stopped. However, this is not the
case. On the molecular level, there is frantic activity. Equilibrium is not static but is a
highly dynamic situation. The concept of chemical equilibrium is analogous to the ﬂow
of cars across a bridge connecting two island cities. Suppose the trafﬁc ﬂow on the bridge

The effect of temperature on the endothermic, aqueous equilibrium:
Co(H2O)62  4Cl  ∆ CoCl42  6H2O
Pink

Blue

The violet solution in the center is at 25°C and contains signiﬁcant quantities of both pink Co(H2O)62 and blue CoCl42. When the solution is
cooled, it turns pink because the equilibrium is shifted to the left. Heating the solution favors the blue CoCl42 ions.

579

580

(a)

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

(b)

(c)
Time

(d)

FIGURE 13.1
A molecular representation of the reaction 2NO2(g) n N2O4(g) over time in a closed vessel. Note that the numbers of NO2 and N2O4 in the
container become constant (c and d) after sufﬁcient time has passed.

is the same in both directions. It is obvious that there is motion, since one can see the cars
traveling back and forth across the bridge, but the number of cars in each city is not changing because equal numbers of cars are entering and leaving. The result is no net change
in the car population.
To see how this concept applies to chemical reactions, consider the reaction between
steam and carbon monoxide in a closed vessel at a high temperature where the reaction
takes place rapidly:
H2O1g2  CO1g2 ∆ H2 1g2  CO2 1g2

FIGURE 13.2
The changes in concentrations with time
for the reaction H2O( g)  CO( g) ∆
H2( g)  CO2( g) when equimolar quantities
of H2O( g) and CO( g) are mixed.

Concentration

Assume that the same number of moles of gaseous CO and gaseous H2O are placed in a
closed vessel and allowed to react. The plots of the concentrations of reactants and products versus time are shown in Fig. 13.2. Note that since CO and H2O were originally present in equal molar quantities, and since they react in a 1:1 ratio, the concentrations of the
two gases are always equal. Also, since H2 and CO2 are formed in equal amounts, they
are always present in the same concentrations.
Figure 13.2 is a proﬁle of the progress of the reaction. When CO and H2O are mixed,
they immediately begin to react to form H2 and CO2. This leads to a decrease in the concentrations of the reactants, but the concentrations of the products, which were initially
at zero, are increasing. Beyond a certain time, indicated by the dashed line in Fig. 13.2,
the concentrations of reactants and products no longer change—equilibrium has been
reached. Unless the system is somehow disturbed, no further changes in concentrations
will occur. Note that although the equilibrium position lies far to the right, the concentrations of reactants never go to zero; the reactants will always be present in small but
constant concentrations. This is shown on the microscopic level in Fig. 13.3.
What would happen to the gaseous equilibrium mixture of reactants and products
represented in Fig. 13.3, parts (c) and (d), if we injected some H2O(g) into the box? To
answer this question, we need to be sure we understand the equilibrium condition: The

[CO] or [H 2O]
[CO2] or [H 2]

Time

Equilibrium

13.1 The Equilibrium Condition

(a)

(b)

(c)
Time

581

(d)

FIGURE 13.3
(a) H2O and CO are mixed in equal numbers and begin to react (b) to form CO2 and H2. After time has passed, equilibrium is reached (c) and
the numbers of reactant and product molecules then remain constant over time (d).

concentrations of reactants and products remain constant at equilibrium because the forward
and reverse reaction rates are equal. If we inject some H2O molecules, what will happen to
the forward reaction: H2O  CO S H2  CO2? It will speed up because more H2O molecules means more collisions between H2O and CO molecules. This in turn will form more
products and will cause the reverse reaction H2O  CO d H2  CO2 to speed up. Thus
the system will change until the forward and reverse reaction rates again become equal. Will
this new equilibrium position contain more or fewer product molecules than are shown in
Fig. 13.3(c) and (d)? Think about this carefully. If you are not sure of the answer now, keep
reading. We will consider this type of situation in more detail later in this chapter.
Why does equilibrium occur? We saw in Chapter 12 that molecules react by colliding with one another, and the more collisions, the faster the reaction. This is why reaction rates depend on concentrations. In this case the concentrations of H2O and CO are
lowered by the forward reaction:
H2O  CO ¡ H2  CO2
As the concentrations of the reactants decrease, the forward reaction slows down (Fig.
13.4). As in the bridge trafﬁc analogy, there is also a reverse direction:
H2O  CO — H2  CO2

FIGURE 13.4
The changes with time in the rates of
forward and reverse reactions for
H2O( g)  CO( g) ∆ H2( g)  CO2( g)
when equimolar quantities of H2O( g)
and CO( g) are mixed. The rates do not
change in the same way with time because
the forward reaction has a much larger rate
constant than the reverse reaction.

Reaction rates

A double arrow (w
x) is used to show that
a reaction can occur in either direction.

Initially in this experiment no H2 and CO2 were present, and this reverse reaction could
not occur. However, as the forward reaction proceeds, the concentrations of H2 and CO2
build up, and the rate of the reverse reaction increases (Fig. 13.4) as the forward reaction
slows down. Eventually, the concentrations reach levels where the rate of the forward
reaction equals the rate of the reverse reaction. The system has reached equilibrium.

Forward
rate

Equilibrium
Reverse
rate

Forward rate = Reverse rate
Time

582

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

The relationship between equilibrium
and thermodynamics is explored in
Section 16.8.

The equilibrium position of a reaction—left, right, or somewhere in between—is
determined by many factors: the initial concentrations, the relative energies of the reactants and products, and the relative degree of “organization” of the reactants and products. Energy and organization come into play because nature tries to achieve minimum
energy and maximum disorder, as we will show in detail in Chapter 16. For now, we will
simply view the equilibrium phenomenon in terms of the rates of opposing reactions.

The Characteristics of Chemical Equilibrium
To explore the important characteristics of chemical equilibrium, we will consider the synthesis of ammonia from elemental nitrogen and hydrogen:
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
The United States produces about
20 million tons of ammonia annually.

Molecules with strong bonds produce
large activation energies and tend to
react slowly at 25C.

Concentration

Equilibrium

H2
NH 3
N2
Time

FIGURE 13.5
A concentration proﬁle for the reaction
N2 ( g)  3H2 ( g) ∆ 2NH3 ( g) when only
N2 ( g) and H2 ( g) are mixed initially.

This process is of great commercial value because ammonia is an important fertilizer for
the growth of corn and other crops. Ironically, this beneﬁcial process was discovered in
Germany just before World War I in a search for ways to produce nitrogen-based explosives. In the course of this work, German chemist Fritz Haber (1868–1934) pioneered the
large-scale production of ammonia.
When gaseous nitrogen, hydrogen, and ammonia are mixed in a closed vessel at 25°C,
no apparent change in the concentrations occurs over time, regardless of the original
amounts of the gases. Why? There are two possible reasons why the concentrations of the
reactants and products of a given chemical reaction remain unchanged when mixed.
1. The system is at chemical equilibrium.
2. The forward and reverse reactions are so slow that the system moves toward equilibrium at a rate that cannot be detected.
The second reason applies to the nitrogen, hydrogen, and ammonia mixture at 25°C.
As we saw in Chapters 8 and 9, the N2 molecule has a very strong triple bond (941 kJ/mol)
and thus is very unreactive. Also, the H2 molecule has an unusually strong single bond
(432 kJ/mol). Therefore, mixtures of N2, H2, and NH3 at 25°C can exist with no apparent
change over long periods of time, unless a catalyst is introduced to speed up the forward
and reverse reactions. Under appropriate conditions, the system does reach equilibrium,
as shown in Fig. 13.5. Note that because of the reaction stoichiometry, H2 disappears three
times as fast as N2 does and NH3 forms twice as fast as N2 disappears.

13.2
The law of mass action is based on
experimental observation.

The Equilibrium Constant

Science is fundamentally empirical—it is based on experiment. The development of the
equilibrium concept is typical. From their observations of many chemical reactions, two
Norwegian chemists, Cato Maximilian Guldberg (1836–1902) and Peter Waage (1833–1900),
proposed in 1864 the law of mass action as a general description of the equilibrium condition. Guldberg and Waage postulated that for a reaction of the type
jA  kB ∆ lC  mD
where A, B, C, and D represent chemical species and j, k, l, and m are their coefﬁcients
in the balanced equation, the law of mass action is represented by the following equilibrium expression:
K

3C4 l 3D4 m
3A4 j 3B4 k

The square brackets indicate the concentrations of the chemical species at equilibrium,
and K is a constant called the equilibrium constant.

13.2 The Equilibrium Constant
Sample Exercise 13.1

583

Writing Equilibrium Expressions
Write the equilibrium expression for the following reaction:
4NH3 1g2  7O2 1g2 ∆ 4NO2 1g2  6H2O1g2
Solution
Applying the law of mass action gives
Coefﬁcient
of NO2

Coefﬁcient
of H2O

8n
88

n
88
88

3NO2 4 4 3H2O4 6
8888n

3NH3 4 4 3O2 4 7

88
8n

K

The square brackets indicate concentration in units of mol/L.

Coefﬁcient
of O2

Coefﬁcient
of NH3

See Exercise 13.17.
The value of the equilibrium constant at a given temperature can be calculated if we
know the equilibrium concentrations of the reaction components, as illustrated in Sample
Exercise 13.2.
It is very important to note at this point that the equilibrium constants are customarily given without units. The reason for this is beyond the scope of this text, but it involves
corrections for the nonideal behavior of the substances taking part in the reaction. When
these corrections are made, the units cancel out and the corrected K has no units. Thus
we will not use units for K in this text.
Sample Exercise 13.2

Calculating the Values of K
The following equilibrium concentrations were observed for the Haber process at 127°C:
3NH3 4  3.1  102 mol/L
3N2 4  8.5  101 mol/L
3H2 4  3.1  103 mol/L
a. Calculate the value of K at 127°C for this reaction.
b. Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant at 127°C for the reaction
2NH3 1g2 ∆ N2 1g2  3H2 1g2
c. Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant at 127°C for the reaction given by the
equation
1
2 N2 1g2

 32 H2 1g2 ∆ NH3 1g2

Solution
a. The balanced equation for the Haber process is
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
Thus
K

3NH3 4 2

3N2 4 3 H2 4
 3.8  104

3



Note that K is written without units.

13.1  102 2 2

18.5  101 213.1  103 2 3

584

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
b.

This reaction is written in the reverse order from the equation given in part a. This
leads to the equilibrium expression
3N2 4 3 H2 4 3

K¿ 

3NH3 4 2

which is the reciprocal of the expression used in part a. Therefore,
K¿ 
c.

3N2 4 3H2 4 3
3NH3 4 2



1
1

 2.6  105
K
3.8  104

We use the law of mass action:
K– 

3NH3 4

3N2 4 1 2 3H2 4 3 2

If we compare this expression to that obtained in part a, we see that since
3NH3 4

3NH3 4 2

a

3N2 4 1 2 3H2 4 3 2
3N2 4 3 H2 4
K–  K1 2
Thus

b
3

12

K–  K1 2  13.8  104 2 1 2  1.9  102
See Exercises 13.19 and 13.21 through 13.24.

We can draw some important conclusions from the results of Sample Exercise 13.2.
For a reaction of the form
jA  kB ∆ lC  mD
the equilibrium expression is
K

3C4 l 3D4 m
3A4 j 3B4 k

If this reaction is reversed, then the new equilibrium expression is
K¿ 

3A4 j 3B4 k

3C4 3D4
l

m



1
K

If the original reaction is multiplied by some factor n to give
njA  nkB ∆ nlC  nmD
the equilibrium expression becomes
K– 

3 C4 nl 3D4 nm
3A4 nj 3B4 nk

 Kn

We Can Summarize These Conclusions About the Equilibrium Expression
as Follows:
䊉

The equilibrium expression for a reaction is the reciprocal of that for the reaction written in reverse.

䊉

When the balanced equation for a reaction is multiplied by a factor n, the equilibrium expression for the new reaction is the original expression raised to the nth power.
Thus Knew  (Koriginal)n.

䊉

K values are customarily written without units.

13.2 The Equilibrium Constant
The law of mass action applies to solution
and gaseous equilibria.

The law of mass action is widely applicable. It correctly describes the equilibrium behavior of an amazing variety of chemical systems in solution and in the gas
phase. Although, as we will see later, corrections must be applied in certain cases,
such as for concentrated aqueous solutions and for gases at high pressures, the law of
mass action provides a remarkably accurate description of all types of chemical
equilibria.
Consider again the ammonia synthesis reaction. The equilibrium constant K always
has the same value at a given temperature. At 500°C the value of K is 6.0  102. Whenever N2, H2, and NH3 are mixed together at this temperature, the system will always come
to an equilibrium position such that
3 NH3 4 2

3N2 4 3H2 4 3

A cross section showing how anhydrous
ammonia is injected into the soil to act as
a fertilizer.

For a reaction at a given temperature,
there are many equilibrium positions but
only one value for K.

Sample Exercise 13.3

585

 6.0  102

This expression has the same value at 500°C, regardless of the amounts of the gases that
are mixed together initially.
Although the special ratio of products to reactants deﬁned by the equilibrium expression is constant for a given reaction system at a given temperature, the equilibrium
concentrations will not always be the same. Table 13.1 gives three sets of data for the synthesis of ammonia, showing that even though the individual sets of equilibrium concentrations are quite different for the different situations, the equilibrium constant, which
depends on the ratio of the concentrations, remains the same (within experimental error).
Note that subscript zeros indicate initial concentrations.
Each set of equilibrium concentrations is called an equilibrium position. It is essential to distinguish between the equilibrium constant and the equilibrium positions for
a given reaction system. There is only one equilibrium constant for a particular system at
a particular temperature, but there are an inﬁnite number of equilibrium positions. The
speciﬁc equilibrium position adopted by a system depends on the initial concentrations,
but the equilibrium constant does not.

Equilibrium Positions
The following results were collected for two experiments involving the reaction at 600°C
between gaseous sulfur dioxide and oxygen to form gaseous sulfur trioxide:

Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Initial

Equilibrium

Initial

Equilibrium

3 SO2 4 0  2.00 M
3O2 4 0  1.50 M
3 SO3 4 0  3.00 M

3SO2 4  1.50 M
3 O2 4  1.25 M
3SO3 4  3.50 M

3SO2 4 0  0.500 M
3 O2 4 0  0
3SO3 4 0  0.350 M

3SO2 4  0.590 M
3 O2 4  0.0450 M
3 SO3 4  0.260 M

Show that the equilibrium constant is the same in both cases.
Solution
The balanced equation for the reaction is
2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2SO3 1g2
From the law of mass action,
K

3SO3 4 2

3SO2 4 2 3O2 4

586

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

TABLE 13.1
2NH3( g)

Results of Three Experiments for the Reaction N2( g)  3H2( g) ∆

Experiment
I

II

III

Initial
Concentrations

Equilibrium
Concentrations

K

[NH3] 2
[N2][H2] 3

3 N2 4 0  1.000 M
3 H2 4 0  1.000 M
3NH3 4 0  0

3N2 4  0.921 M
3H2 4  0.763 M
3NH3 4  0.157 M

K  6.02  102

3 N2 4 0  0
3 H2 4 0  0
3NH3 4 0  1.000 M

3N2 4  0.399 M
3H2 4  1.197 M
3NH3 4  0.203 M

K  6.02  102

3 N2 4 0  2.00 M
3 H2 4 0  1.00 M
3NH3 4 0  3.00 M

3N2 4  2.59 M
3H2 4  2.77 M
3NH3 4  1.82 M

K  6.02  102

For Experiment 1,
K1 

13.502 2

11.502 2 11.252

 4.36

For Experiment 2,
K2 

10.2602 2

10.5902 2 10.04502

 4.32

The value of K is constant, within experimental error.
See Exercise 13.24.

13.3

Equilibrium Expressions Involving Pressures

So far we have been describing equilibria involving gases in terms of concentrations. Equilibria involving gases also can be described in terms of pressures. The relationship between the pressure and the concentration of a gas can be seen from the ideal gas equation:
The ideal gas equation was discussed in
Section 5.3.

PV  nRT

n
P  a bRT  CRT
V

or

where C equals nV, or the number of moles n of gas per unit volume V. Thus C represents
the molar concentration of the gas.
For the ammonia synthesis reaction, the equilibrium expression can be written in terms
of concentrations, that is,
K

3NH3 4 2

3N2 4 3H2 4 3



CNH32

1CN2 21CH23 2

 Kc

or in terms of the equilibrium partial pressures of the gases, that is,
Kp 
K involves concentrations; Kp involves
pressures. In some books, the symbol
Kc is used instead of K.

PNH32

1PN2 21PH23 2

Both the symbols K and Kc are used commonly for an equilibrium constant in terms of
concentrations. We will always use K in this book. The symbol Kp represents an equilibrium constant in terms of partial pressures.

13.3 Equilibrium Expressions Involving Pressures

Sample Exercise 13.4

587

Calculating Values of Kp
The reaction for the formation of nitrosyl chloride
2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2 ∆ 2NOCl1g2
was studied at 25°C. The pressures at equilibrium were found to be
PNOCl  1.2 atm
PNO  5.0  102 atm
PCl2  3.0  101 atm
Calculate the value of Kp for this reaction at 25°C.
Solution
For this reaction,
Kp 

11.22 2
PNOCl2

1PNO2 2 2 1PCl2 2
15.0  102 2 2 13.0  101 2

 1.9  103
See Exercises 13.25 and 13.26.
The relationship between K and Kp for a particular reaction follows from the fact that
for an ideal gas, C  P RT. For example, for the ammonia synthesis reaction,
P  CRT or C 

P
RT

K

3NH3 4 2

3N2 4 3H2 4 3
a

PNH3

b



CNH32

1CN2 21CH23 2
a

1 2
b
PNH3
RT
RT



PN2 PH2 3
1 4
1PN2 21PH23 2
a ba b
a b
RT RT
RT
PNH32
1RT2 2

1PN2 21PH23 2
 Kp 1RT2 2
2

2

However, for the synthesis of hydrogen ﬂuoride from its elements,
H2 1g2  F2 1g2 ∆ 2HF1g2
the relationship between K and Kp is given by

3HF4 2
CHF2

3H2 4 3F2 4
1CH2 21CF2 2
2
PHF
a
b
PHF2
RT


PH2 PF2
1PH2 21PF2 2
a ba b
RT RT

K

 Kp
Thus, for this reaction, K is equal to Kp. This equality occurs because the sum of the
coefﬁcients on either side of the balanced equation is identical, so the terms in RT cancel out. In the equilibrium expression for the ammonia synthesis reaction, the sum of
the powers in the numerator is different from that in the denominator, and K does not
equal Kp.

588

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
For the general reaction
jA  kB ∆ lC  mD
the relationship between K and Kp is
Kp  K1RT2 ¢n
where ¢n is the sum of the coefﬁcients of the gaseous products minus the sum of the coefﬁcients of the gaseous reactants. This equation is quite easy to derive from the deﬁnitions
of K and Kp and the relationship between pressure and concentration. For the preceding
general reaction,
Kp 

1PC l 21PDm 2

1CC  RT2 l 1CD  RT2 m

1CA  RT2 j 1CB  RT2 k
1RT2 lm

 K1RT2 1lm21jk2

1CA j 21CBk 2
1RT2 jk
 K1RT2 ¢n

Sample Exercise 13.5

where ¢n  (l  m)  ( j  k), the difference in the sums of the coefﬁcients for the
gaseous products and reactants.

Calculating K from Kp
Using the value of Kp obtained in Sample Exercise 13.4, calculate the value of K at 25°C
for the reaction
2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2 ∆ 2NOCl1g2
Solution
From the value of Kp, we can calculate K using
Kp  K1RT2 ¢n
where T  25  273  298 K and

¢n  2  12  12  1
n
n

n always involves products minus
reactants.

1PA j 21PBk 2
1CCl 21CDm 2



Sum of
product
coefﬁcients

Sum of
reactant
coefﬁcients

n
g

Thus

Kp  K1RT2 1 

K
RT

and
K  Kp 1RT2
 11.9  103 210.08206212982
 4.6  104
See Exercises 13.27 and 13.28.

13.4

Heterogeneous Equilibria

So far we have discussed equilibria only for systems in the gas phase, where all reactants
and products are gases. These are homogeneous equilibria. However, many equilibria involve more than one phase and are called heterogeneous equilibria. For example, the

13.4 Heterogeneous Equilibria

589

thermal decomposition of calcium carbonate in the commercial preparation of lime occurs
by a reaction involving both solid and gas phases:
CaCO3 1s2 ∆ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2

Lime is among the top ﬁve chemicals
manufactured in the United States in
terms of the amount produced.

h
Lime

Straightforward application of the law of mass action leads to the equilibrium expression
The concentrations of pure liquids and
solids are constant.

K¿ 

3CO2 4 3CaO4
3CaCO3 4

However, experimental results show that the position of a heterogeneous equilibrium
does not depend on the amounts of pure solids or liquids present (see Fig. 13.6). The fundamental reason for this behavior is that the concentrations of pure solids and liquids cannot change. Thus the equilibrium expression for the decomposition of solid calcium
carbonate might be represented as
K¿ 

3CO2 4C1
C2

where C1 and C2 are constants representing the concentrations of the solids CaO and
CaCO3, respectively. This expression can be rearranged to give
C2K¿
 K  3CO2 4
C1
We can generalize from this result as follows: If pure solids or pure liquids are
involved in a chemical reaction, their concentrations are not included in the equilibrium expression for the reaction. This simpliﬁcation occurs only with pure solids or
liquids, not with solutions or gases, since in these last two cases the concentrations
can vary.
For example, in the decomposition of liquid water to gaseous hydrogen and oxygen,
2H2O1l2 ∆ 2H2 1g2  O2 1g2
where
K  3H2 4 2 3O2 4
The Seven Sisters chalk cliffs in East
Sussex, England. The chalk is made up of
compressed calcium carbonate skeletons of
microscopic algae from the late Cretaceous
Period.

and Kp  1PH22 21PO2 2

water is not included in either equilibrium expression because it is a pure liquid. However, if the reaction were carried out under conditions where the water is a gas rather than
a liquid, that is,
2H2O1g2 ∆ 2H2 1g2  O2 1g2

CO2

FIGURE 13.6
The position of the equilibrium
CaCO3(s) ∆ CaO(s)  CO2(g) does not
depend on the amounts of CaCO3(s) and
CaO(s) present.

CaCO3

CaO

(a)

(b)

590

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
then
K

3H2 4 2 3O2 4
3H2O4 2

and

Kp 

1PH22 21PO2 2
PH2O2

because the concentration or pressure of water vapor can change.

Sample Exercise 13.6

Equilibrium Expressions for Heterogeneous Equilibria
Write the expressions for K and Kp for the following processes:
a. Solid phosphorus pentachloride decomposes to liquid phosphorus trichloride and chlorine gas.
b. Deep blue solid copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate is heated to drive off water vapor to
form white solid copper(II) sulfate.
Solution
a. The reaction is
PCl5 1s2 ∆ PCl3 1l2  Cl2 1g2
The equilibrium expressions are
K  3Cl2 4

and

Kp  PCl2

In this case neither the pure solid PCl5 nor the pure liquid PCl3 is included in the equilibrium expressions.
b. The reaction is
CuSO4  5H2O1s2 ∆ CuSO4 1s2  5H2O1g2
The equilibrium expressions are
K  3H2O4 5

and

Kp  1PH2O 2 5

The solids are not included.
See Exercise 13.29.

Hydrated copper(II) sulfate on the left.
Water applied to anhydrous copper(II)
sulfate, on the right, forms the hydrated
compound.

13.5 Applications of the Equilibrium Constant

13.5

591

Applications of the Equilibrium Constant

Knowing the equilibrium constant for a reaction allows us to predict several important features of the reaction: the tendency of the reaction to occur (but not the speed
of the reaction), whether a given set of concentrations represents an equilibrium condition, and the equilibrium position that will be achieved from a given set of initial
concentrations.
To introduce some of these ideas, we will ﬁrst consider the reaction
+

+

where and represent two different types of atoms. Assume that this reaction has an
equilibrium constant equal to 16.
In a given experiment, the two types of molecules are mixed together in the following amounts:

After the system reacts and comes to equilibrium, what will the system look like? We
know that at equilibrium the ratio
(N

) (N

)

(N

) (N

)

= 16

must be satisﬁed, where each N represents the number of molecules of each type. We originally have 9
molecules and 12
molecules. As a place to start, let’s just assume
that 5
molecules disappear for the system to reach equilibrium. Since equal numbers
of the
and
molecules react, this means that 5
molecules also will disappear.
This also means that 5
molecules and 5
molecules will be formed. We can summarize as follows:
Initial Conditions

9
12
0
0

New Conditions

9−5=4
12 − 5 = 7
0+5=5
0+5=5

molecules
molecules
molecules
molecules

molecules
molecules
molecules
molecules

Do the new conditions represent equilibrium for this reaction system? We can ﬁnd out by
taking the ratio of the numbers of molecules:
(N

) (N

)

(N

) (N

)

=

(5)(5)
= 0.9
(4)(7)

Thus this is not an equilibrium position because the ratio is not 16, as required for
equilibrium. In which direction must the system move to achieve equilibrium? Since the

592

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
observed ratio is smaller than 16, we must increase the numerator and decrease the
denominator: The system needs to move to the right (toward more products) to achieve
equilibrium. That is, more than 5 of the original reactant molecules must disappear to
reach equilibrium for this system. How can we ﬁnd the correct number? Since we do not
know the number of molecules that need to disappear to reach equilibrium, let’s call this
number x. Now we can set up a table similar to the one we used earlier:

Initial Conditions

9
12
0
0

Equilibrium Conditions

molecules
molecules
molecules
molecules

x
x
x
x

9−x
12 − x
x
x

disappear
disappear
form
form

molecules
molecules
molecules
molecules

For the system to be at equilibrium, we know that the following ratio must be satisﬁed:
(N

) (N

)

(N

) (N

)

= 16 =

(x)(x)
(9 − x)(12 − x)

The easiest way to solve for x here is by trial and error. From our previous discussion we
know that x is greater than 5. Also, we know that it must be less than 9 because we have
only 9
molecules to start. We can’t use all of them or we will have a zero in the denominator, which causes the ratio to be inﬁnitely large. By trial and error, we ﬁnd that
x  8 because
1x21x2
182182
64


 16
19  x2112  x2
19  82112  82
4

The equilibrium mixture can be pictured as follows:

Note that it constains 8
molecules, 8
molecules, 1
molecule, and 4
molecules as required.
This pictorial example should help you understand the fundamental ideas of equilibrium. Now we will proceed to a more systematic quantitative treatment of chemical
equilibrium.

The Extent of a Reaction
The inherent tendency for a reaction to occur is indicated by the magnitude of the equilibrium constant. A value of K much larger than 1 means that at equilibrium the reaction

13.5 Applications of the Equilibrium Constant

system will consist of mostly products—the equilibrium lies to the right. Another way of
saying this is that reactions with very large equilibrium constants go essentially to completion. On the other hand, a very small value of K means that the system at equilibrium
will consist of mostly reactants—the equilibrium position is far to the left. The given reaction does not occur to any signiﬁcant extent.
It is important to understand that the size of K and the time required to reach equilibrium are not directly related. The time required to achieve equilibrium depends on the
reaction rate, which is determined by the size of the activation energy. The size of K is
determined by thermodynamic factors such as the difference in energy between products
and reactants. This difference is represented in Fig. 13.7 and will be discussed in detail
in Chapter 16.

H
A

B

(a)

Ea
H2,O2
∆E

593

H2O

Reaction Quotient
(b)

FIGURE 13.7
(a) A physical analogy illustrating the difference between thermodynamic and kinetic
stabilities. The boulder is thermodynamically more stable (lower potential energy)
in position B than in position A but cannot
get over the hump H. (b) The reactants H2
and O2 have a strong tendency to form
H2O. That is, H2O has lower energy than
H2 and O2. However, the large activation
energy Ea prevents the reaction at 25°C.
In other words, the magnitude of K for the
reaction depends on ¢E, but the reaction
rate depends on Ea.

When the reactants and products of a given chemical reaction are mixed, it is useful to
know whether the mixture is at equilibrium or, if not, the direction in which the system
must shift to reach equilibrium. If the concentration of one of the reactants or products is
zero, the system will shift in the direction that produces the missing component. However, if all the initial concentrations are nonzero, it is more difﬁcult to determine the direction of the move toward equilibrium. To determine the shift in such cases, we use the
reaction quotient, Q. The reaction quotient is obtained by applying the law of mass action using initial concentrations instead of equilibrium concentrations. For example, for
the synthesis of ammonia
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
the expression for the reaction quotient is
Q

3NH3 4 02

3N2 4 0 3H2 4 03

where the subscript zeros indicate initial concentrations.
To determine in which direction a system will shift to reach equilibrium, we compare
the values of Q and K. There are three possible cases:
1. Q is equal to K. The system is at equilibrium; no shift will occur.
2. Q is greater than K. In this case, the ratio of initial concentrations of products to initial concentrations of reactants is too large. To reach equilibrium, a net change of
products to reactants must occur. The system shifts to the left, consuming products
and forming reactants, until equilibrium is achieved.
3. Q is less than K. In this case, the ratio of initial concentrations of products to initial
concentrations of reactants is too small. The system must shift to the right, consuming reactants and forming products, to attain equilibrium.

Sample Exercise 13.7

Using the Reaction Quotient
For the synthesis of ammonia at 500°C, the equilibrium constant is 6.0  102. Predict
the direction in which the system will shift to reach equilibrium in each of the following
cases:
a. [NH3 ] 0  1.0  103 M; [N2 ] 0  1.0  105 M; [H2 ] 0  2.0  103 M
b. [NH3 ] 0  2.00  104 M; [N2 ] 0  1.50  105 M; [H2 ] 0  3.54  101 M
c. [NH3 ] 0  1.0  104 M; [N2 ] 0  5.0 M; [H2 ] 0  1.0  102 M

594

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
Solution
a. First we calculate the value of Q:
Q

3NH3 4 02

3N2 4 0 3H2 4 03
 1.3  107



11.0  103 2 2

11.0  105 212.0  103 2 3

Since K  6.0  102, Q is much greater than K. To attain equilibrium, the concentrations of the products must be decreased and the concentrations of the reactants increased. The system will shift to the left:
N2  3H2 — 2NH3
b. We calculate the value of Q:
Q

3NH3 4 02



3N2 4 0 3H2 4 03
 6.01  102

12.00  104 2 2

11.50  105 213.54  101 2 3

In this case Q  K, so the system is at equilibrium. No shift will occur.
c. The value of Q is
Q

3NH3 4 02

3N2 4 0 3H2 4 03
 2.0  103



11.0  104 2 2

15.0211.0  102 2 3

Here Q is less than K, so the system will shift to the right to attain equilibrium by increasing the concentration of the product and decreasing the reactant concentrations:
N2  3H2 ¡ 2NH3
See Exercises 13.33 through 13.36.

Calculating Equilibrium Pressures and Concentrations
A typical equilibrium problem involves ﬁnding the equilibrium concentrations (or pressures) of reactants and products, given the value of the equilibrium constant and the
initial concentrations (or pressures). However, since such problems sometimes become
complicated mathematically, we will develop useful strategies for solving them by considering cases for which we know one or more of the equilibrium concentrations (or
pressures).

Sample Exercise 13.8

Calculating Equilibrium Pressures I
Dinitrogen tetroxide in its liquid state was used as one of the fuels on the lunar lander for
the NASA Apollo missions. In the gas phase it decomposes to gaseous nitrogen dioxide:
N2O4 1g2 ∆ 2NO2 1g2

Consider an experiment in which gaseous N2O4 was placed in a ﬂask and allowed to reach
equilibrium at a temperature where Kp  0.133. At equilibrium, the pressure of N2O4 was
found to be 2.71 atm. Calculate the equilibrium pressure of NO2(g).

13.5 Applications of the Equilibrium Constant

595

Solution
We know that the equilibrium pressures of the gases NO2 and N2O4 must satisfy the
relationship
Kp 

PNO22
PN2O4

 0.133

Since we know PN2O4, we can simply solve for PNO2:
PNO22  Kp 1PN2O4 2  10.133212.712  0.360
Therefore,
PNO2  20.360  0.600
Apollo II lunar landing module at
Tranquility Base, 1969.

Sample Exercise 13.9

See Exercises 13.37 and 13.38.

Calculating Equilibrium Pressures II
At a certain temperature a 1.00-L ﬂask initially contained 0.298 mol PCl3(g) and
8.70  103 mol PCl5(g). After the system had reached equilibrium, 2.00  103 mol
Cl2(g) was found in the ﬂask. Gaseous PCl5 decomposes according to the reaction
PCl5 1g2 ∆ PCl3 1g2  Cl2 1g2

+

Calculate the equilibrium concentrations of all species and the value of K.
Solution
The equilibrium expression for this reaction is
K

3Cl2 4 3 PCl3 4
3PCl5 4

To ﬁnd the value of K, we must calculate the equilibrium concentrations of all species
and then substitute these quantities into the equilibrium expression. The best method for
ﬁnding the equilibrium concentrations is to begin with the initial concentrations, which
we will deﬁne as the concentrations before any shift toward equilibrium has occurred.
We will then modify these initial concentrations appropriately to ﬁnd the equilibrium
concentrations.
The initial concentrations are
3Cl2 4 0  0
0.298 mol
3PCl3 4 0 
 0.298 M
1.00 L
8.70  103 mol
3PCl5 4 0 
 8.70  103 M
1.00 L
Next we ﬁnd the change required to reach equilibrium. Since no Cl2 was initially present but 2.00  103 M Cl2 is present at equilibrium, 2.00  103 mol PCl5 must have

596

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
decomposed to form 2.00  103 mol Cl2 and 2.00  103 mol PCl3. In other words, to
reach equilibrium, the reaction shifted to the right:
PCl5 1g2
PCl3 1g2

Cl2 1g2
¡
2.00  103 mol ¡ 2.00  103 mol  2.00  103 mol
h

r

p

Net amounts of
products formed

Net amount of PCl5
decomposed

Now we apply this change to the initial concentrations to obtain the equilibrium
concentrations:
3Cl2 4  0 

2.00  103 mol
 2.00  103 M
1.00 L

哬

3Cl2 4 0

3PCl3 4  0.298 M 
哬

3PCl3 4 0

2.00  103 mol
 0.300 M
1.00 L

3PCl5 4  8.70  103 M 
哬

3PCl5 4 0

2.00  103 mol
 6.70  103 M
1.00 L

These equilibrium concentrations can now be used to ﬁnd K:

3Cl2 4 3 PCl3 4
12.00  103 210.3002

3PCl5 4
6.70  103
 8.96  102

K

See Exercises 13.39 through 13.42.

Sometimes we are not given any of the equilibrium concentrations (or pressures), only
the initial values. Then we must use the stoichiometry of the reaction to express concentrations (or pressures) at equilibrium in terms of the initial values. This is illustrated in
Sample Exercise 13.10.

Sample Exercise 13.10

Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations I
Carbon monoxide reacts with steam to produce carbon dioxide and hydrogen. At 700 K
the equilibrium constant is 5.10. Calculate the equilibrium concentrations of all species if
1.000 mol of each component is mixed in a 1.000-L ﬂask.
Solution
The balanced equation for the reaction is

+

CO1g2  H2O1g2 ∆ CO2 1g2  H2 1g2

+
and

K

3CO2 4 3H2 4

3CO4 3 H2O4

 5.10

Next we calculate the initial concentrations:
3CO4 0  3H2O4 0  3CO2 4 0  3H2 4 0 

1.000 mol
 1.000 M
1.000 L

13.5 Applications of the Equilibrium Constant

597

Is the system at equilibrium, and if not, which way will it shift to reach the equilibrium
position? These questions can be answered by calculating Q:
Q

3CO2 4 0 3H2 4 0
11.000 mol/L211.000 mol/L2

 1.000
3CO4 0 3H2O4 0
11.000 mol/L211.000 mol/L2

Since Q is less than K, the system is not at equilibrium initially but must shift to the right.
What are the equilibrium concentrations? As before, we start with the initial concentrations and modify them to obtain the equilibrium concentrations. We must ask this
question: How much will the system shift to the right to attain the equilibrium condition?
In Sample Exercise 13.9 the change needed for the system to reach equilibrium was given.
However, in this case we do not have this information.
Since the required change in concentrations is unknown at this point, we will deﬁne
it in terms of x. Let’s assume that x mol/L CO must react for the system to reach equilibrium. This means that the initial concentration of CO will decrease by x mol/L:
3CO4  3CO4 0  x

h
Equilibrium

h
Initial

h
Change

Since each CO molecule reacts with one H2O molecule, the concentration of water vapor
also must decrease by x mol/L:
3H2O4  3H2O4 0  x
As the reactant concentrations decrease, the product concentrations increase. Since all the
coefﬁcients are 1 in the balanced reaction, 1 mol CO reacting with 1 mol H2O will produce 1 mol CO2 and 1 mol H2. Or in the present case, to reach equilibrium, x mol/L CO
will react with x mol/L H2O to give an additional x mol/L CO2 and x mol/L H2:
xCO  xH2O ¡ xCO2  xH2
Thus the initial concentrations of CO2 and H2 will increase by x mol/L:
3CO2 4  3CO2 4 0  x
3 H2 4  3H2 4 0  x

Now we have all the equilibrium concentrations deﬁned in terms of the initial concentrations and the change x:

Initial
Concentration (mol/L)

Change (mol/L)

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)

3CO 4 0  1.000
3H2O 4 0  1.000
3CO2 4 0  1.000
3 H2 4 0  1.000

x
x
x
x

1.000  x
1.000  x
1.000  x
1.000  x

Note that the sign of x is determined by the direction of the shift. In this example, the system shifts to the right, so the product concentrations increase and the reactant concentrations decrease. Also note that because the coefﬁcients in the balanced equation are all 1,
the magnitude of the change is the same for all species.
Now since we know that the equilibrium concentrations must satisfy the equilibrium
expression, we can ﬁnd the value of x by substituting these concentrations into the
expression
K  5.10 

11.000  x211.000  x2
11.000  x2 2
3CO2 4 3 H2 4


3CO4 3H2O4
11.000  x211.000  x2
11.000  x2 2

598

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
Since the right side of the equation is a perfect square, the solution of the problem can
be simpliﬁed by taking the square root of both sides:
25.10  2.26 

1.000  x
1.000  x

Multiplying and collecting terms gives
x  0.387 mol/L
Thus the system shifts to the right, consuming 0.387 mol/L CO and 0.387 mol/L H2O
and forming 0.387 mol/L CO2 and 0.387 mol/L H2.
Now the equilibrium concentrations can be calculated:
3CO4  3H2O4  1.000  x  1.000  0.387  0.613 M
3CO2 4  3H2 4  1.000  x  1.000  0.387  1.387 M
Reality Check: These values can be checked by substituting them back into the
equilibrium expression to make sure they give the correct value for K:
K

3CO2 4 3H2 4
11.3872 2

 5.12
3CO4 3H2O4
10.6132 2

This result is the same as the given value of K (5.10) within round-off error, so the answer
must be correct.
See Exercise 13.45.

Sample Exercise 13.11

Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations II
Assume that the reaction for the formation of gaseous hydrogen ﬂuoride from hydrogen
and ﬂuorine has an equilibrium constant of 1.15  102 at a certain temperature. In a particular experiment, 3.000 mol of each component was added to a 1.500-L ﬂask. Calculate
the equilibrium concentrations of all species.
Solution
The balanced equation for the reaction is
H2 1g2  F2 1g2 ∆ 2HF1g2
The equilibrium expression is
K  1.15  102 

3HF4 2
3H2 4 3F2 4

We ﬁrst calculate the initial concentrations:
3HF4 0  3H2 4 0  3F2 4 0 

3.000 mol
 2.000 M
1.500 L

Then we ﬁnd the value of Q:
Q

12.0002 2
3HF4 02

 1.000
3H2 4 0 3F2 4 0
12.000212.0002

Since Q is much less than K, the system must shift to the right to reach equilibrium.

599

13.5 Applications of the Equilibrium Constant

What change in the concentrations is necessary? Since this is presently unknown, we
will deﬁne the change needed in terms of x. Let x equal the number of moles per liter of
H2 consumed to reach equilibrium. The stoichiometry of the reaction shows that x mol/L F2
also will be consumed and 2x mol/L HF will be formed:
H2 1g2  F2 1g2 ¡ 2HF1g2
x mol/L  x mol/L ¡ 2x mol/L
Now the equilibrium concentrations can be expressed in terms of x:

Initial
Concentration (mol/L)

Change (mol/L)

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)

3 H2 4 0  2.000
3F2 4 0  2.000
3 HF 4 0  2.000

x
x
2x

3H2 4  2.000  x
3F2 4  2.000  x
3HF4  2.000  2x

These concentrations can be represented in a shorthand table as follows:

We often refer to this form as an ICE
table (indicated by the ﬁrst letters of
Initial, Change, and Equilibrium).



H2(g)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

F2(g)

2.000
x
2.000  x

∆

2.000
x
2.000  x

2HF(g)
2.000
2x
2.000  2x

To solve for x, we substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium
expression:
K  1.15  102 

3HF4 2
12.000  2x2 2

3H2 4 3 F2 4
12.000  x2 2

The right side of this equation is a perfect square, so taking the square root of both
sides gives
21.15  102 

2.000  2x
2.000  x

which yields x  1.528. The equilibrium concentrations can now be calculated:
3H2 4  3F2 4  2.000 M  x  0.472 M
3HF4  2.000 M  2x  5.056 M
Reality Check: Checking these values by substituting them into the equilibrium
expression gives
3HF4 2

3H2 4 3F2 4



15.05622

10.4722 2

 1.15  102

which agrees with the given value of K.
See Exercise 13.46.

600

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

13.6

Solving Equilibrium Problems

We have already considered most of the strategies needed to solve equilibrium problems.
The typical procedure for analyzing a chemical equilibrium problem can be summarized
as follows:

Procedure for Solving Equilibrium Problems

➥1
➥2
➥3
➥4
➥5
➥6
➥7

Write the balanced equation for the reaction.
Write the equilibrium expression using the law of mass action.
List the initial concentrations.
Calculate Q, and determine the direction of the shift to equilibrium.
Deﬁne the change needed to reach equilibrium, and deﬁne the equilibrium concentrations by applying the change to the initial concentrations.
Substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression, and
solve for the unknown.
Check your calculated equilibrium concentrations by making sure they give the
correct value of K.

So far we have been careful to choose systems in which we can solve for the unknown by taking the square root of both sides of the equation. However, this type of system is not really very common, and we must now consider a more typical problem. Suppose
for a synthesis of hydrogen ﬂuoride from hydrogen and ﬂuorine, 3.000 mol H2 and 6.000
mol F2 are mixed in a 3.000-L ﬂask. Assume that the equilibrium constant for the synthesis
reaction at this temperature is 1.15  102. We calculate the equilibrium concentration of
each component as follows:

➥1

We begin, as usual, by writing the balanced equation for the reaction:

➥2

The equilibrium expression is

H2 1g2  F2 1g2 ∆ 2HF1g2

K  1.15  102 

➥3

3HF4 2
3H2 4 3F2 4

The initial concentrations are
3H2 4 0 

3.000 mol
 1.000 M
3.000 L
6.000 mol
3F2 4 0 
 2.000 M
3.000 L
3HF4 0  0

➥ 4 There is no need to calculate Q because no HF is present initially, and we know
that the system must shift to the right to reach equilibrium.
➥5

If we let x represent the number of moles per liter of H2 consumed to reach equilibrium, we can represent the equilibrium concentrations as follows:
H2(g)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

1.000
x
1.000  x



F2(g)
2.000
x
2.000  x

∆

2HF(g)
0
2x
2x

13.6 Solving Equilibrium Problems

➥6

601

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression gives
K  1.15  102 

3HF4 2
12x2 2

3H2 4 3F2 4
11.000  x212.000  x2

Since the right side of this equation is not a perfect square, we cannot take the square root
of both sides, but must use some other procedure.
First, do the indicated multiplication:
11.000  x212.000  x211.15  102 2  12x2 2

or

11.15  102 2x2  3.00011.15  102 2x  2.00011.15  102 2  4x2

and collect terms

11.11  102 2x2  13.45  102 2x  2.30  102  0

This is a quadratic equation of the general form
ax2  bx  c  0
Use of the quadratic formula is explained
in Appendix 1.4.

where the roots can be obtained from the quadratic formula:
x

b  2b2  4ac
2a

In this example, a  1.11  102, b  3.45  102, and c  2.30  102. Substituting
these values into the quadratic formula gives two values for x:
x  2.14 mol/L and

x  0.968 mol/L

Both these results cannot be valid (since a given set of initial concentrations leads to only
one equilibrium position). How can we choose between them? Since the expression for
the equilibrium concentration of H2 is
3H2 4  1.000 M  x

the value of x cannot be 2.14 mol/L (because subtracting 2.14 M from 1.000 M gives a
negative concentration of H2, which is physically impossible). Thus the correct value for
x is 0.968 mol/L, and the equilibrium concentrations are as follows:
3H2 4  1.000 M  0.968 M  3.2  102 M
3F2 4  2.000 M  0.968 M  1.032 M
3HF4  210.968 M2  1.936 M
Reality Check:

➥ 7 We can check these concentrations by substituting them into the equilibrium
expression:
3HF4 2
11.9362 2

 1.13  102
3H2 4 3 F2 4
13.2  102 211.0322
This value is in close agreement with the given value for K (1.15  102), so the calculated equilibrium concentrations are correct.
This procedure is further illustrated for a problem involving pressures in Sample
Exercise 13.12.
Sample Exercise 13.12

Calculating Equilibrium Pressures
Assume that gaseous hydrogen iodide is synthesized from hydrogen gas and iodine vapor
at a temperature where the equilibrium constant is 1.00  102. Suppose HI at 5.000  101
atm, H2 at 1.000  102 atm, and I2 at 5.000  103 atm are mixed in a 5.000-L ﬂask.
Calculate the equilibrium pressures of all species.

602

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
Solution
The balanced equation for this process is
H2 1g2  I2 1g2 ∆ 2HI1g2
and the equilibrium expression in terms of pressure is
Kp 

PHI2
 1.00  102
1PH2 21PI2 2

The given initial pressures are
PHI0  5.000  101 atm
PH20  1.000  102 atm
PI20  5.000  103 atm
The value of Q for this system is
Q

1PHI0 2 2

1PH2 21PI2 2
0

0



15.000  101 atm2 2

11.000  102 atm215.000  103 atm2

 5.000  103

Since Q is greater than K, the system will shift to the left to reach equilibrium.
So far we have used moles or concentrations in stoichiometric calculations. However, it is equally valid to use pressures for a gas-phase system at constant temperature and volume because in this case pressure is directly proportional to the number
of moles:
P  na

RT — Constant if constant T and V
b
V

Thus we can represent the change needed to achieve equilibrium in terms of pressures.
Let x be the change in pressure (in atm) of H2 as the system shifts left toward equilibrium. This leads to the following equilibrium pressures:

H2(g)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

1.000  102
x
1.000  102  x



I2(g)

2HI(g)

∆

5.000  103
x
5.000  103  x

5.000  101
2x
5.000  101  2x

Substitution into the equilibrium expression gives
Kp 

1PHI 2 2
15.000  101  2x2 2

1PH2 21PI2 2
11.000  102  x215.000  103  x2

Multiplying and collecting terms yield the quadratic equation where a  9.60  101,
b  3.5, and c  2.45  101:
19.60  101 2x2  3.5x  12.45  101 2  0

From the quadratic formula, the correct value for x is x  3.55  102 atm. The equilibrium pressures can now be calculated from the expressions involving x:
PHI  5.000  101 atm  213.55  102 2 atm  4.29  101 atm
PH2  1.000  102 atm  3.55  102 atm  4.55  102 atm
PI2  5.000  103 atm  3.55  102 atm  4.05  102 atm

13.6 Solving Equilibrium Problems
Reality Check:

603

14.29  101 2 2
PHI2
 99.9

PH2  PI2
14.55  102 214.05  102 2

This agrees with the given value of K 11.00  102), so the calculated equilibrium concentrations are correct.
See Exercises 13.47 through 13.50.

Treating Systems That Have Small Equilibrium Constants
We have seen that fairly complicated calculations are often necessary to solve equilibrium
problems. However, under certain conditions, simpliﬁcations are possible that greatly reduce the mathematical difﬁculties. For example, gaseous NOCl decomposes to form the
gases NO and Cl2. At 35°C the equilibrium constant is 1.6  105. In an experiment in
which 1.0 mol NOCl is placed in a 2.0-L ﬂask, what are the equilibrium concentrations?
The balanced equation is
2NOCl1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2
3NO4 2 3Cl2 4
3NOCl4 2

 1.6  105

1.0 mol
 0.50 M
2.0 L

3NO4 0  0

K

and

The initial concentrations are
3NOCl4 0 

3Cl2 4 0  0

Since there are no products initially, the system will move to the right to reach equilibrium. We will deﬁne x as the change in concentration of Cl2 needed to reach equilibrium. The changes in the concentrations of NOCl and NO can then be obtained from the
balanced equation:
2NOCl1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2
2x
2x  x
¡
The concentrations can be summarized as follows:

2NOCl(g)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

2NO(g)

∆

0.50
2x
0.50  2x



0
2x
2x

Cl2(g)
0
x
x

The equilibrium concentrations must satisfy the equilibrium expression
K  1.6  105 

3NO4 2 3Cl2 4
3NOCl4 2



12x2 2 1x2

10.50  2x2 2

Multiplying and collecting terms will give an equation with terms containing x3, x2, and
x, which requires complicated methods to solve directly. However, we can avoid this situation by recognizing that since K is so small (1.6  105), the system will not proceed
far to the right to reach equilibrium. That is, x represents a relatively small number. The
consequence of this fact is that the term 10.50  2x2 can be approximated by 0.50. That
is, when x is small,
0.50  2x  0.50

604

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

Approximations can simplify complicated
math, but their validity should be
checked carefully.

Making this approximation allows us to simplify the equilibrium expression:
1.6  105 
Solving for x3 gives
x3 

12x2 2 1x2

10.50  2x2 2



12x2 2 1x2
10.502 2



4x3
10.502 2

11.6  105 210.502 2
 1.0  106
4

and x  1.0  102.
How valid is this approximation? If x  1.0  102, then

0.50  2x  0.50  211.0  102 2  0.48

The difference between 0.50 and 0.48 is 0.02, or 4% of the initial concentration of NOCl,
a relatively small discrepancy that will have little effect on the outcome. That is, since 2x
is very small compared with 0.50, the value of x obtained in the approximate solution
should be very close to the exact value. We use this approximate value of x to calculate
the equilibrium concentrations:
3NOCl4  0.50  2x  0.50 M
3NO4  2x  211.0  102 M2  2.0  102 M
3Cl2 4  x  1.0  102 M
Reality Check:
3NO4 2 3Cl2 4
3NOCl4

2



12.0  102 2 2 11.0  102 2
10.502 2

 1.6  105

Since the given value of K is 1.6  105, these calculated concentrations are correct.
This problem was much easier to solve than it appeared at ﬁrst because the small
value of K and the resulting small shift to the right to reach equilibrium allowed
simpliﬁcation.

13.7

Le Châtelier’s Principle

It is important to understand the factors that control the position of a chemical equilibrium. For example, when a chemical is manufactured, the chemists and chemical engineers in charge of production want to choose conditions that favor the desired product as
much as possible. That is, they want the equilibrium to lie far to the right. When Fritz
Haber was developing the process for the synthesis of ammonia, he did extensive studies
on how temperature and pressure affect the equilibrium concentration of ammonia. Some
of his results are given in Table 13.2. Note that the equilibrium amount of NH3 increases

TABLE 13.2 The Percent by Mass of NH3 at Equilibrium in a Mixture
of N2, H2, and NH3 as a Function of Temperature and Total Pressure*
Total Pressure
Temperature (°C)

300 atm

400 atm

500 atm

400
500
600

48% NH3
26% NH3
13% NH3

55% NH3
32% NH3
17% NH3

61% NH3
38% NH3
21% NH3

*Each experiment was begun with a 3:1 mixture of H 2 and N 2.

13.7 Le Châtelier’s Principle

Visualization: Le Châtelier’s
Principle

605

with an increase in pressure but decreases as the temperature is increased. Thus the amount
of NH3 present at equilibrium is favored by conditions of low temperature and high
pressure.
However, this is not the whole story. Carrying out the process at low temperatures is
not feasible because then the reaction is too slow. Even though the equilibrium tends to
shift to the right as the temperature is lowered, the attainment of equilibrium would be
much too slow at low temperatures to be practical. This emphasizes once again that we
must study both the thermodynamics and the kinetics of a reaction before we really
understand the factors that control it.
We can qualitatively predict the effects of changes in concentration, pressure, and
temperature on a system at equilibrium by using Le Châtelier’s principle, which states
that if a change is imposed on a system at equilibrium, the position of the equilibrium will
shift in a direction that tends to reduce that change. Although this rule sometimes oversimpliﬁes the situation, it works remarkably well.

The Effect of a Change in Concentration
To see how we can predict the effect of change in concentration on a system at equilibrium, we will consider the ammonia synthesis reaction. Suppose there is an equilibrium
position described by these concentrations:
3N2 4  0.399 M

3H2 4  1.197 M

3NH3 4  0.202 M

What will happen if 1.000 mol/L N2 is suddenly injected into the system? We can answer
this question by calculating the value of Q. The concentrations before the system adjusts
are
3N2 4 0  0.399 M  1.000 M  1.399 M
3H2 4 0  1.197 M
3NH3 4 0  0.202 M

h
Added N2

Note we are labeling these as “initial concentrations” because the system is no longer at
equilibrium. Then
Q

3NH3 4 02

3N2 4 0 3H2 4 03



10.2022 2

11.399211.1972 3

 1.70  102

Since we are not given the value of K, we must calculate it from the ﬁrst set of equilibrium concentrations:
K

3NH3 4 2

3N2 4 3H2 4 3



10.2022 2

10.399211.1972 3

 5.96  102

As expected, Q is less than K because the concentration of N2 was increased.
The system will shift to the right to come to the new equilibrium position. Rather
than do the calculations, we simply summarize the results:
Equilibrium Position I
[N2]  0.399 M
[H2]  1.197 M
[NH3]  0.202 M

Equilibrium Position II
1.000 mol/L
of N2 added

[N2]  1.348 M
[H2]  1.044 M
[NH3]  0.304 M

606

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

N2 added
N2
H2
NH3

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIGURE 13.8
(a) The initial equilibrium mixture of N2, H2, and NH3. (b) Addition of N2. (c) The new equilibrium position for
the system containing more N2 (due to addition of N2), less H2, and more NH3 than in (a).

The system shifts in the direction that
compensates for the imposed change.

Sample Exercise 13.13

Note from these data that the equilibrium position does in fact shift to the right: The
concentration of H2 decreases, the concentration of NH3 increases, and of course,
since nitrogen is added, the concentration of N2 shows an increase relative to the
amount present in the original equilibrium position. (However, notice that the nitrogen
showed a decrease relative to the amount present immediately after addition of the
1.000 mol N2.)
We can understand this shift by thinking about reaction rates. When we add N2 molecules to the system, the number of collisions between N2 and H2 will increase, thus increasing the rate of the forward reaction and in turn increasing the rate of formation of
NH3 molecules. More NH3 molecules will in turn lead to a higher rate for the reverse reaction. Eventually, the forward and reverse reaction rates will again become equal, and
the system will reach its new equilibrium position.
We can predict this shift qualitatively by using Le Châtelier’s principle. Since the
change imposed is the addition of nitrogen, Le Châtelier’s principle predicts that the system will shift in a direction that consumes nitrogen. This reduces the effect of the addition. Thus Le Châtelier’s principle correctly predicts that adding nitrogen will cause the
equilibrium to shift to the right (see Fig. 13.8).
If ammonia had been added instead of nitrogen, the system would have shifted to the
left to consume ammonia. So another way of stating Le Châtelier’s principle is to say that
if a component (reactant or product) is added to a reaction system at equilibrium (at constant T and P or constant T and V), the equilibrium position will shift in the direction that
lowers the concentration of that component. If a component is removed, the opposite effect
occurs.

Using Le Châtelier’s Principle I
Arsenic can be extracted from its ores by ﬁrst reacting the ore with oxygen (called roasting)
to form solid As4O6, which is then reduced using carbon:
As4O6 1s2  6C1s2 ∆ As4 1g2  6CO1g2

Predict the direction of the shift of the equilibrium position in response to each of the
following changes in conditions.
a. Addition of carbon monoxide
b. Addition or removal of carbon or tetraarsenic hexoxide (As4O6 )
c. Removal of gaseous arsenic (As4 )

13.7 Le Châtelier’s Principle

607

Solution
a. Le Châtelier’s principle predicts that the shift will be away from the substance whose
concentration is increased. The equilibrium position will shift to the left when carbon
monoxide is added.
b. Since the amount of a pure solid has no effect on the equilibrium position, changing
the amount of carbon or tetraarsenic hexoxide will have no effect.
c. If gaseous arsenic is removed, the equilibrium position will shift to the right to form
more products. In industrial processes, the desired product is often continuously
removed from the reaction system to increase the yield.
See Exercise 13.57.

The Effect of a Change in Pressure
Visualization: Equilibrium
Decomposition of N2O4

Basically, there are three ways to change the pressure of a reaction system involving
gaseous components:
1. Add or remove a gaseous reactant or product.
2. Add an inert gas (one not involved in the reaction).
3. Change the volume of the container.
We have already considered the addition or removal of a reactant or product. When an
inert gas is added, there is no effect on the equilibrium position. The addition of an inert
gas increases the total pressure but has no effect on the concentrations or partial pressures of the reactants or products. That is, in this case the added molecules do not
participate in the reaction in any way and thus cannot affect the equilibrium in any way.
Thus the system remains at the original equilibrium position.
When the volume of the container is changed, the concentrations (and thus the partial pressures) of both reactants and products are changed. We could calculate Q and predict the direction of the shift. However, for systems involving gaseous components, there
is an easier way: We focus on the volume. The central idea is that when the volume of the

(a) Brown NO2( g ) and colorless N2O4( g)
in equilibrium in a syringe. (b) The volume is suddenly decreased, giving a
greater concentration of both N2O4 and
NO2 (indicated by the darker brown
color). (c) A few seconds after the sudden
volume decrease, the color is much
lighter brown as the equilibrium shifts
the brown NO2( g ) to colorless N2O4( g) as
predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle, since
in the equilibrium
2NO2( g ) ∆ N2O4( g)
the product side has the smaller number
of molecules.

(a)

(b)

(c)

608

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

N2
H2

FIGURE 13.9
(a) A mixture of NH3 ( g), N2 1g2, and H2 ( g)
at equilibrium. (b) The volume is suddenly
decreased. (c) The new equilibrium position
for the system containing more NH3 and
less N2 and H2. The reaction N2 ( g) 
3H2 ( g) ∆ 2NH3 ( g) shifts to the right
(toward the side with fewer molecules)
when the container volume is decreased.

NH3

(a)

(b)

(c)

container holding a gaseous system is reduced, the system responds by reducing its own
volume. This is done by decreasing the total number of gaseous molecules in the system.
To see that this is true, we can rearrange the ideal gas law to give
Va

RT
bn
P

or at constant T and P,
V r n
That is, at constant temperature and pressure, the volume of a gas is directly proportional
to the number of moles of gas present.
Suppose we have a mixture of the gases nitrogen, hydrogen, and ammonia at equilibrium (Fig. 13.9). If we suddenly reduce the volume, what will happen to the equilibrium position? The reaction system can reduce its volume by reducing the number of molecules present. This means that the reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
will shift to the right, since in this direction four molecules (one of nitrogen and three of
hydrogen) react to produce two molecules (of ammonia), thus reducing the total number
of gaseous molecules present. The new equilibrium position will be farther to the right
than the original one. That is, the equilibrium position will shift toward the side of the
reaction involving the smaller number of gaseous molecules in the balanced equation.
The opposite is also true. When the container volume is increased, the system will shift
so as to increase its volume. An increase in volume in the ammonia synthesis system will
produce a shift to the left to increase the total number of gaseous molecules present.
Sample Exercise 13.14

Using Le Châtelier’s Principle II
Predict the shift in equilibrium position that will occur for each of the following processes
when the volume is reduced.
a. The preparation of liquid phosphorus trichloride by the reaction
P4 1s2  6Cl2 1g2 ∆ 4PCl3 1l2
b. The preparation of gaseous phosphorus pentachloride according to the equation
PCl3 1g2  Cl2 1g2 ∆ PCl5 1g2
c. The reaction of phosphorus trichloride with ammonia:
PCl3 1g2  3NH3 1g2 ∆ P1NH2 2 3 1g2  3HCl1g2
Solution
a. Since P4 and PCl3 are a pure solid and a pure liquid, respectively, we need to consider
only the effect of the change in volume on Cl2. The volume is decreased, so the position

13.7 Le Châtelier’s Principle

609

of the equilibrium will shift to the right, since the reactant side contains six gaseous
molecules and the product side has none.
b. Decreasing the volume will shift the given reaction to the right, since the product side
contains only one gaseous molecule while the reactant side has two.
c. Both sides of the balanced reaction equation have four gaseous molecules. A
change in volume will have no effect on the equilibrium position. There is no shift
in this case.
See Exercise 13.58.

The Effect of a Change in Temperature
It is important to realize that although the changes we have just discussed may alter the
equilibrium position, they do not alter the equilibrium constant. For example, the addition of a reactant shifts the equilibrium position to the right but has no effect on the value
of the equilibrium constant; the new equilibrium concentrations satisfy the original equilibrium constant.
The effect of temperature on equilibrium is different, however, because the value of
K changes with temperature. We can use Le Châtelier’s principle to predict the direction
of the change.
The synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen is exothermic. We can represent this by treating energy as a product:
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2  92 kJ
Of course, energy is not a chemical
product of this reaction, but thinking of
it in this way makes it easy to apply Le
Châtelier’s principle.

If energy is added to this system at equilibrium by heating it, Le Châtelier’s principle predicts that the shift will be in the direction that consumes energy, that is, to the left. Note
that this shift decreases the concentration of NH3 and increases the concentrations of N2

Shifting the N2O4( g ) n 2NO2( g) equilibrium by changing the temperature. (a) At 100C the ﬂask is deﬁnitely reddish brown due to a large amount of NO2 present. (b) At 0C the equilibrium is shifted toward colorless N2O4( g).

610

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

TABLE 13.3 Observed Value of
K for the Ammonia Synthesis
Reaction as a Function of
Temperature*
Temperature (K)

K

500
600
700
800

90
3
0.3
0.04

*For this exothermic reaction, the value of
K decreases as the temperature increases, as
predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle.

Sample Exercise 13.15
TABLE 13.4 Shifts in the
Equilibrium Position for the
Reaction 58 kJ  N2O4(g)
∆ 2NO2(g)
Change
Addition of N2O4 1g2
Addition of NO2 1g2
Removal of N2O4 1g2
Removal of NO2 1g2
Addition of He1g2
Decrease container
volume
Increase container
volume
Increase temperature
Decrease temperature

and H2, thus decreasing the value of K. The experimentally observed change in K with
temperature for this reaction is indicated in Table 13.3. The value of K decreases with
increased temperature, as predicted.
On the other hand, for an endothermic reaction, such as the decomposition of calcium
carbonate,
556 kJ  CaCO3 1s2 ∆ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2
an increase in temperature will cause the equilibrium to shift to the right and the value of
K to increase.
In summary, to use Le Châtelier’s principle to describe the effect of a temperature
change on a system at equilibrium, treat energy as a reactant (in an endothermic process)
or as a product (in an exothermic process), and predict the direction of the shift in the
same way as when an actual reactant or product is added or removed. Although Le
Châtelier’s principle cannot predict the size of the change in K, it does correctly predict
the direction of the change.

Using Le Châtelier’s Principle III
For each of the following reactions, predict how the value of K changes as the temperature is increased.
a. N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2
b. 2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2SO3 1g2

¢H°  181 kJ
¢H°  198 kJ

Shift

Solution

Right
Left
Left
Right
None
Left

a. This is an endothermic reaction, as indicated by the positive value for ¢H°. Energy
can be viewed as a reactant, and K increases (the equilibrium shifts to the right) as the
temperature is increased.
b. This is an exothermic reaction (energy can be regarded as a product). As the temperature is increased, the value of K decreases (the equilibrium shifts to the left).
See Exercises 13.63 and 13.64.

Right
Right
Left

We have seen how Le Châtelier’s principle can be used to predict the effect of several
types of changes on a system at equilibrium. To summarize these ideas, Table 13.4 shows
how various changes affect the equilibrium position of the endothermic reaction
N2O4 1g2 ∆ 2NO2 1g2

Key Terms
chemical equilibrium

Section 13.2
law of mass action
equilibrium expression
equilibrium constant
equilibrium position

Section 13.4
homogeneous equilibria
heterogeneous equilibria

For Review
Chemical equilibrium
䊉 When a reaction takes place in a closed system, it reaches a condition where the
concentrations of the reactants and products remain constant over time
䊉 Dynamic state: reactants and products are interconverted continually
• Forward rate  reverse rate
䊉 The law of mass action: for the reaction
jA  kB ∆ mC  nD

Section 13.5
reaction quotient, Q

Section 13.7
Le Châtelier’s principle

¢H°  58 kJ

K

3C4 m 3D4 n
3A4 j 3B4 k

 equilibrium constant

For Review

611

• A pure liquid or solid is never included in the equilibrium expression
• For a gas-phase reaction the reactants and products can be described in terms of
their partial pressures and the equilibrium constant is called Kp:
Kp  K1RT2 ¢n
where ¢n is the sum of the coefﬁcients of the gaseous products minus the sum
of the coefﬁcients of the gaseous reactants
Equilibrium position
䊉 A set of reactant and product concentrations that satisﬁes the equilibrium constant
expression
• There is one value of K for a given system at a given temperature
• There are an inﬁnite number of equilibrium positions at a given temperature depending on the initial concentrations
䊉 A small value of K means the equilibrium lies to the left; a large value of K
means the equilibrium lies to the right
• The size of K has no relationship to the speed at which equilibrium is achieved
䊉 Q, the reaction quotient, applies the law of mass action to initial concentrations
rather than equilibrium concentrations
• If Q 7 K, the system will shift to the left to achieve equilibrium
• If Q 6 K, the system will shift to the right to achieve equilibrium
䊉 Finding the concentrations that characterize a given equilibrium position:
1. Start with the given initial concentrations (pressures)
2. Deﬁne the change needed to reach equilibrium
3. Apply the change to the initial concentrations (pressures) and solve for the
equilibrium concentrations (pressures)
Le Châtelier’s principle
䊉 Enables qualitative prediction of the effects of changes in concentration, pressure,
and temperature on a system at equilibrium
䊉 If a change in conditions is imposed on a system at equilibrium, the system will
shift in a direction that compensates for the imposed change
• In other words, when a stress is placed on a system at equilibrium, the system
shifts in the direction that relieves the stress

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Characterize a system at chemical equilibrium with respect to each of the following.
a. the rates of the forward and reverse reactions
b. the overall composition of the reaction mixture
For a general reaction 3A(g)  B(g) ¡ 2C(g), if one starts an experiment
with only reactants present, show what the plot of concentrations of A, B, and
C versus time would look like. Also sketch the plot illustrating the rate of the
forward reaction and rate of the reverse reaction versus time.
2. What is the law of mass action? Is it true that the value of K depends on the
amounts of reactants and products mixed together initially? Explain. Is it true that
reactions with large equilibrium constant values are very fast? Explain. There is
only one value of the equilibrium constant for a particular system at a particular
temperature, but there is an inﬁnite number of equilibrium positions. Explain.
3. Consider the following reactions at some temperature:
2NOCl1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2
2NO1g2 ∆ N2 1g2  O2 1g2

K  1.6  105
K  1  1031

612

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

For each reaction, assume some quantities of the reactants were placed in separate containers and allowed to come to equilibrium. Describe the relative
amounts of reactants and products that would be present at equilibrium. At
equilibrium, which is faster, the forward or reverse reaction in each case?
What is the difference between K and Kp? When does K  Kp for a reaction?
When does K  Kp for a reaction? If the coefﬁcients in a reaction equation are
tripled, how is the new value of K related to the initial value of K? If a reaction
is reversed, how is the value of Kp for the reversed reaction related to the value
of Kp for the initial reaction?
What are homogeneous equilibria? Heterogeneous equilibria? What is the
difference in writing K expressions for homogeneous versus heterogeneous reactions? Summarize which species are included in the K expression and which
species are not included.
Distinguish between the terms equilibrium constant and reaction quotient.
When Q  K, what does this say about a reaction? When Q 6 K, what does
this say about a reaction? When Q 7 K, what does this say about a reaction?
Summarize the steps for solving equilibrium problems (see the beginning of
Section 13.6). In general, when solving an equilibrium problem, you should
always set up an ICE table. What is an ICE table?
A common type of reaction we will study is that having a very small K value
(K V 1). Solving for equilibrium concentrations in an equilibrium problem usually requires many mathematical operations to be performed. However, the math
involved when solving equilibrium problems for reactions having small K values
(K V 1) is simpliﬁed. What assumption is made when solving the equilibrium
concentrations for reactions with small K values? Whenever assumptions are
made, they must be checked for validity. In general, the “5% rule” is used to
check the validity of assuming x (or 2x, 3x, and so on) is very small compared to
some number. When x (or 2x, 3x, and so on) is less than 5% of the number the
assumption was made against, then the assumption is said to be valid. If the 5%
rule fails, what do you do to solve for the equilibrium concentrations?
What is Le Châtelier’s principle? Consider the reaction 2NOCl(g) ∆
2NO(g)  Cl2 (g). If this reaction is at equilibrium, what happens when the
following changes occur?
a. NOCl(g) is added.
b. NO(g) is added.
c. NOCl(g) is removed.
d. Cl2(g) is removed.
e. The container volume is decreased.
For each of these changes, what happens to the value of K for the reaction as
equilibrium is reached again? Give an example of a reaction for which the
addition or removal of one of the reactants or products has no effect on the
equilibrium position.
In general, how will the equilibrium position of a gas-phase reaction be
affected if the volume of the reaction vessel changes? Are there reactions that
will not have their equilibria shifted by a change in volume? Explain. Why
does changing the pressure in a rigid container by adding an inert gas not shift
the equilibrium position for a gas-phase reaction?
The only “stress” (change) that also changes the value of K is a change in temperature. For an exothermic reaction, how does the equilibrium position change
as temperature increases, and what happens to the value of K? Answer the
same questions for an endothermic reaction. If the value of K increases with a
decrease in temperature, is the reaction exothermic or endothermic? Explain.

Active Learning Questions

order in terms of increasing equilibrium concentration of B and
explain.

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. Consider an equilibrium mixture of four chemicals (A, B, C, and
D, all gases) reacting in a closed ﬂask according to the equation:
AB ∆ CD
a. You add more A to the ﬂask. How does the concentration of
each chemical compare to its original concentration after equilibrium is reestablished? Justify your answer.
b. You have the original setup at equilibrium, and add more D to
the ﬂask. How does the concentration of each chemical compare to its original concentration after equilibrium is reestablished? Justify your answer.
2. The boxes shown below represent a set of initial conditions for
the reaction:

+

613

+
K = 25

Draw a quantitative molecular picture that shows what this system looks like after the reactants are mixed in one of the boxes
and the system reaches equilibrium. Support your answer with
calculations.

+

3. For the reaction H2 (g)  I2 (g) ∆ 2HI(g), consider two possibilities: (a) you mix 0.5 mol of each reactant, allow the system
to come to equilibrium, and then add another mole of H2 and allow the system to reach equilibrium again, or (b) you mix 1.5 mol
H2 and 0.5 mol I2 and allow the system to reach equilibrium. Will
the ﬁnal equilibrium mixture be different for the two procedures?
Explain.
4. Given the reaction A(g)  B(g) ∆ C(g)  D(g), consider
the following situations:
i. You have 1.3 M A and 0.8 M B initially.
ii. You have 1.3 M A, 0.8 M B, and 0.2 M C initially.
iii. You have 2.0 M A and 0.8 M B initially.
Order the preceding situations in terms of increasing equilibrium concentration of D. Explain your order. Then give the

5. Consider the reaction A(g)  2B(g) ∆ C(g)  D(g) in a
1.0-L rigid ﬂask. Answer the following questions for each situation (a–d):
i. Estimate a range (as small as possible) for the requested
substance. For example, [A] could be between 95 M and
100 M.
ii. Explain how you decided on the limits for the estimated
range.
iii. Indicate what other information would enable you to narrow your estimated range.
iv. Compare the estimated concentrations for a through d, and
explain any differences.
a. If at equilibrium [A]  1 M, and then 1 mol C is added,
estimate the value for [A] once equilibrium is reestablished.
b. If at equilibrium [B]  1 M, and then 1 mol C is added, estimate the value for [B] once equilibrium is reestablished.
c. If at equilibrium [C]  1 M, and then 1 mol C is added,
estimate the value for [C] once equilibrium is reestablished.
d. If at equilibrium [D]  1 M, and then 1 mol C is added, estimate the value for [D] once equilibrium is reestablished.
6. Consider the reaction A(g)  B(g) ∆ C(g)  D(g). A friend
asks the following: “I know we have been told that if a mixture
of A, B, C, and D is at equilibrium and more of A is added, more
C and D will form. But how can more C and D form if we do not
add more B?” What do you tell your friend?
7. Consider the following statements: “Consider the reaction
A(g)  B(g) ∆ C(g), for which at equilibrium [A]  2 M,
[B]  1 M, and [C]  4 M. To a 1-L container of the system at
equilibrium you add 3 moles of B. A possible equilibrium condition is [A]  1 M, [B]  3 M, and [C]  6 M because in both
cases K  2.” Indicate everything that is correct in these
statements and everything that is incorrect. Correct the incorrect
statements, and explain.
8. Le Châtelier’s principle is stated (Section 13.7) as follows: “If a
change is imposed on a system at equilibrium, the position of the
equilibrium will shift in a direction that tends to reduce that
change.” The system N2  3H2 ∆ 2NH3 is used as an example
in which the addition of nitrogen gas at equilibrium results in a
decrease in H2 concentration and an increase in NH3 concentration. In the experiment the volume is assumed to be constant. On
the other hand, if N2 is added to the reaction system in a container
with a piston so that the pressure can be held constant, the amount
of NH3 actually could decrease and the concentration of H2 would
increase as equilibrium is reestablished. Explain how this can happen. Also, if you consider this same system at equilibrium, the
addition of an inert gas, holding the pressure constant, does affect the equilibrium position. Explain why the addition of an inert gas to this system in a rigid container does not affect the equilibrium position.
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

614

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium
14. Consider the following reactions.

Questions

H2 1g2  I2 1g2 ¡ 2HI1g2

9. Consider the following reaction:
H2O1g2  CO1g2 ∆ H2 1g2  CO2 1g2
Amounts of H2O, CO, H2, and CO2 are put into a ﬂask so that the
composition corresponds to an equilibrium position. If the CO
placed in the ﬂask is labeled with radioactive 14C, will 14C be
found only in CO molecules for an indeﬁnite period of time?
Explain.
10. Consider the same reaction as in Exercise 9. In one experiment
1.0 mol H2O(g) and 1.0 mol CO(g) are put into a ﬂask and heated
to 350°C. In a second experiment 1.0 mol H2 (g) and 1.0 mol
CO2 (g) are put into another ﬂask with the same volume as the
ﬁrst. This mixture is also heated to 350°C. After equilibrium is
reached, will there be any difference in the composition of the
mixtures in the two ﬂasks?
11. Consider the following reaction at some temperature:
H2O1g2  CO1g2 ∆ H2 1g2  CO2 1g2

K  2.0

Some molecules of H2O and CO are placed in a 1.0-L container
as shown below.

and

H2 1g2  I2 1s2 ¡ 2HI1g2

List two property differences between these two reactions that
relate to equilibrium.
15. For a typical equilibrium problem, the value of K and the initial
reaction conditions are given for a speciﬁc reaction, and you are
asked to calculate the equilibrium concentrations. Many of these
calculations involve solving a quadratic or cubic equation. What
can you do to avoid solving a quadratic or cubic equation and still
come up with reasonable equilibrium concentrations?
16. Which of the following statements is(are) true? Correct the false
statement(s).
a. When a reactant is added to a system at equilibrium at a
given temperature, the reaction will shift right to reestablish
equilibrium.
b. When a product is added to a system at equilibrium at a given
temperature, the value of K for the reaction will increase when
equilibrium is reestablished.
c. When temperature is increased for a reaction at equilibrium,
the value of K for the reaction will increase.
d. When the volume of a reaction container is increased for a
system at equilibrium at a given temperature, the reaction will
shift left to reestablish equilibrium.
e. Addition of a catalyst (a substance that increases the speed of
the reaction) has no effect on the equilibrium position.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

The Equilibrium Constant

When equilibrium is reached, how many molecules of
H2O, CO, H2 and CO2 are present? Do this problem by trial and
error—that is, if two molecules of CO react, is this equilibrium;
if three molecules of CO react, is this equilibrium; and so on.
12. Consider the following generic reaction:
2A2B1g2 ∆ 2A2 1g2  B2 1g2
Some molecules of A2B are placed in a 1.0-L container. As time
passes, several snapshots of the reaction mixture are taken as illustrated below.

17. Write the equilibrium expression (K) for each of the following
gas-phase reactions.
a. N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2
b. N2O4 1g2 ∆ 2NO2 1g2
c. SiH4 1g2  2Cl2 1g2 ∆ SiCl4 1g2  2H2 1g2
d. 2PBr3 1g2  3Cl2 1g2 ∆ 2PCl3 1g2  3Br2 1g2
18. Write the equilibrium expression (Kp) for each reaction in
Exercise 17.
19. At a given temperature, K  1.3  102 for the reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2

Calculate values of K for the following reactions at this temperature.
a. 12 N2 1g2  32 H2 1g2 ∆ NH3 1g2
b. 2NH3 1g2 ∆ N2 1g2  3H2 1g2
c. NH3 1g2 ∆ 12 N2 1g2  32 H2 1g2
d. 2N2 1g2  6H2 1g2 ∆ 4NH3 1g2
20. For the reaction
H2 1g2  Br2 1g2 ∆ 2HBr1g2

Which illustration is the ﬁrst to represent an equilibrium mixture?
Explain. How many molecules of A2B reacted initially?
13. Explain the difference between K, Kp, and Q.

Kp  3.5  104 at 1495 K. What is the value of Kp for the
following reactions at 1495 K?
a. HBr1g2 ∆ 12H2 1g2  12 Br2 1g2
b. 2HBr1g2 ∆ H2 1g2  Br2 1g2
c. 12 H2 1g2  12 Br2 1g2 ∆ HBr1g2

Exercises

615

28. At 1100 K, Kp  0.25 for the reaction

21. For the reaction
2NO1g2  2H2 1g2 ∆ N2 1g2  2H2O1g2
it is determined that, at equilibrium at a particular temperature, the
concentrations are as follows: [NO(g) 4  8.1  103 M, [H2 (g)] 
4.1  105 M, [N2 (g)]  5.3  102 M, and [H2O(g) 4 
2.9  103 M. Calculate the value of K for the reaction at this
temperature.
22. For the reaction
N2 1g2  3Cl2 1g2 ∆ 2NCl3 1g2
an analysis of an equilibrium mixture is performed at a certain temperature. It is found that [NCl3 (g)]  1.9  101 M, [N2 (g)] 
1.4  103 M, and [Cl2 (g)]  4.3  104 M. Calculate K for the
reaction at this temperature.
23. At a particular temperature, a 3.0-L ﬂask contains 2.4 mol Cl2,
1.0 mol NOCl, and 4.5  103 mol NO. Calculate K at this temperature for the following reaction:
2NOCl1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2
24. At a particular temperature a 2.00-L ﬂask at equilibrium contains
2.80  104 mol N2, 2.50  105 mol O2, and 2.00  102 mol
N2O. Calculate K at this temperature for the reaction
2N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2N2O1g2
If 3 N2 4  2.00  104 M, 3N2O 4  0.200 M, and 3O2 4  0.00245
M, does this represent a system at equilibrium?
25. The following equilibrium pressures at a certain temperature were
observed for the reaction
2NO2 1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2  O2 1g2
PNO2  0.55 atm
PNO  6.5  105 atm
PO2  4.5  105 atm
Calculate the value for the equilibrium constant Kp at this temperature.
26. The following equilibrium pressures were observed at a certain
temperature for the reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
PNH3  3.1  102 atm
1

PN2  8.5  10

atm

PH2  3.1  103 atm
Calculate the value for the equilibrium constant Kp at this temperature.
If PN2  0.525 atm, PNH3  0.0167 atm, and PH2 
0.00761 atm, does this represent a system at equilibrium?
27. At 327°, the equilibrium concentrations are [CH3OH] 
0.15 M, [ CO]  0.24 M, and [ H2 ]  1.1 M for the reaction
CH3OH1g2 ∆ CO1g2  2H2 1g2
Calculate Kp at this temperature.

2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2SO3 1g2

What is the value of K at this temperature?
29. Write expressions for K and Kp for the following reactions.
a. 2NH3 1g2  CO2 1g2 ∆ N2CH4O1s2  H2O1g2
b. 2NBr3 1s2 ∆ N2 1g2  3Br2 1g2
c. 2KClO3 1s2 ∆ 2KCl1s2  3O2 1g2
d. CuO1s2  H2 1g2 ∆ Cu1l2  H2O1g2
30. For which reactions in Exercise 29 is Kp equal to K?
31. Consider the following reaction at a certain temperature:
4Fe1s2  3O2 1g2 ∆ 2Fe2O3 1s2
An equilibrium mixture contains 1.0 mol Fe, 1.0  103 mol O2,
and 2.0 mol Fe2O3 all in a 2.0-L container. Calculate the value of
K for this reaction.
32. In a study of the reaction
3Fe1s2  4H2O1g2 ∆ Fe3O4 1s2  4H2 1g2
at 1200 K it was observed that when the equilibrium partial pressure of water vapor is 15.0 torr, that total pressure at equilibrium
is 36.3 torr. Calculate the value of Kp for this reaction at 1200 K.
Hint: Apply Dalton’s law of partial pressures.

Equilibrium Calculations
33. The equilibrium constant, K, is 2.4  103 at a certain temperature
for the reaction
2NO1g2 ∆ N2 1g2  O2 1g2
For which of the following sets of conditions is the system at equilibrium? For those that are not at equilibrium, in which direction
will the system shift?
a. A 1.0-L ﬂask contains 0.024 mol NO, 2.0 mol N2, and 2.6
mol O2.
b. A 2.0-L ﬂask contains 0.032 mol NO, 0.62 mol N2, and 4.0
mol O2.
c. A 3.0-L ﬂask contains 0.060 mol NO, 2.4 mol N2, and 1.7
mol O2.
34. The equilibrium constant, Kp, is 2.4  103 at a certain temperature for the reaction
2NO1g2 ∆ N2 1g2  O2 1g2
For which of the following sets of conditions is the system at equilibrium? For those that are not at equilibrium, in which direction
will the system shift?
a. PNO  0.010 atm, PN2  0.11 atm, PO2  2.0 atm
b. PNO  0.0078 atm, PN2  0.36 atm, PO2  0.67 atm
c. PNO  0.0062 atm, PN2  0.51 atm, PO2  0.18 atm
35. At 900°C, Kp  1.04 for the reaction

CaCO3 1s2 ∆ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2

At a low temperature, dry ice (solid CO2), calcium oxide, and
calcium carbonate are introduced into a 50.0-L reaction chamber. The temperature is raised to 900°C, resulting in the dry ice

616

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

converting to gaseous CO2. For the following mixtures, will the
initial amount of calcium oxide increase, decrease, or remain the
same as the system moves toward equilibrium at 900°C?
a. 655 g CaCO3, 95.0 g CaO, PCO2  2.55 atm
b. 780 g CaCO3, 1.00 g CaO, PCO2  1.04 atm
c. 0.14 g CaCO3, 5000 g CaO, PCO2  1.04 atm
d. 715 g CaCO3, 813 g CaO, PCO2  0.211 atm
36. Ethyl acetate is synthesized in a nonreacting solvent (not water)
according to the following reaction:
CH3CO2H  C2H5OH ∆ CH3CO2C2H5  H2O
Acetic acid

Ethanol

K  2.2

Ethyl acetate

For the following mixtures (a–d), will the concentration of H2O
increase, decrease, or remain the same as equilibrium is established?
a. [CH3CO2C2H5 ]  0.22 M, [H2O]  0.10 M,
[CH3CO2H]  0.010 M, [C2H5OH]  0.010 M
b. [CH3CO2C2H5 ]  0.22 M, [H2O]  0.0020 M,
[CH3CO2H]  0.0020 M, [C2H5OH]  0.10 M
c. [CH3CO2C2H5 ]  0.88 M, [H2O]  0.12 M,
[CH3CO2H]  0.044 M, [C2H5OH]  6.0 M
d. [CH3CO2C2H5 ]  4.4 M, [H2O]  4.4 M,
[CH3CO2H]  0.88 M, [C2H5OH]  10.0 M
e. What must the concentration of water be for a mixture with
[CH3CO2C2H5 ]  2.0 M, [CH3CO2H]  0.10 M, [C2H5OH] 
5.0 M to be at equilibrium?
f. Why is water included in the equilibrium expression for this
reaction?
37. For the reaction
2H2O1g2 ∆ 2H2 1g2  O2 1g2
K  2.4  103 at a given temperature. At equilibrium it is found
that [H2O(g)]  1.1  101 M and [H2 (g)]  1.9  102 M.
What is the concentration of O2 (g) under these conditions?
38. The reaction
2NO1g2  Br2 1g2 ∆ 2NOBr1g2
has Kp  109 at 25°C. If the equilibrium partial pressure of Br2
is 0.0159 atm and the equilibrium partial pressure of NOBr is
0.0768 atm, calculate the partial pressure of NO at equilibrium.
39. A 1.00-L ﬂask was ﬁlled with 2.00 mol gaseous SO2 and 2.00 mol
gaseous NO2 and heated. After equilibrium was reached, it was
found that 1.30 mol gaseous NO was present. Assume that the
reaction
SO2 1g2  NO2 1g2 ∆ SO3 1g2  NO1g2
occurs under these conditions. Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant, K, for this reaction.

40. A sample of S8 1g2 is placed in an otherwise empty rigid container
at 1325 K at an initial pressure of 1.00 atm, where it decomposes
to S2 1g2 by the reaction
S8 1g2 ∆ 4S2 1g2

At equilibrium, the partial pressure of S8 is 0.25 atm. Calculate
Kp for this reaction at 1325 K.

41. At a particular temperature, 12.0 mol of SO3 is placed into a 3.0-L
rigid container, and the SO3 dissociates by the reaction
2SO3 1g2 ∆ 2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2

At equilibrium, 3.0 mol of SO2 is present. Calculate K for this
reaction.
42. At a certain temperature, 4.0 mol NH3 is introduced into a 2.0-L
container, and the NH3 partially dissociates by the reaction
2NH3 1g2 ∆ N2 1g2  3H2 1g2
At equilibrium, 2.0 mol NH3 remains. What is the value of K for
this reaction?
43. An initial mixture of nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas is reacted in
a rigid container at a certain temperature by the reaction
3H2 1g2  N2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
At equilibrium, the concentrations are [H2 ]  5.0 M, [N2 ]  8.0
M, and [NH3 ]  4.0 M. What were the concentrations of nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas that were reacted initially?
44. Nitrogen gas (N2 ) reacts with hydrogen gas (H2 ) to form ammonia (NH3 ). At 200°C in a closed container, 1.00 atm of nitrogen
gas is mixed with 2.00 atm of hydrogen gas. At equilibrium, the
total pressure is 2.00 atm. Calculate the partial pressure of
hydrogen gas at equilibrium.
45. At a particular temperature, K  3.75 for the reaction
SO2 1g2  NO2 1g2 ∆ SO3 1g2  NO1g2

If all four gases had initial concentrations of 0.800 M, calculate
the equilibrium concentrations of the gases.
46. At a particular temperature, K  1.00  102 for the reaction
H2 1g2  I2 1g2 ∆ 2HI1g2

In an experiment, 1.00 mol H2, 1.00 mol I2, and 1.00 mol HI are
introduced into a 1.00-L container. Calculate the concentrations
of all species when equilibrium is reached.
47. At 2200°C, Kp  0.050 for the reaction

N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2

What is the partial pressure of NO in equilibrium with N2 and O2
that were placed in a ﬂask at initial pressures of 0.80 and 0.20 atm,
respectively?
48. At 25°C, K  0.090 for the reaction
H2O1g2  Cl2O1g2 ∆ 2HOCl1g2
Calculate the concentrations of all species at equilibrium for each
of the following cases.
a. 1.0 g H2O and 2.0 g Cl2O are mixed in a 1.0-L ﬂask.
b. 1.0 mol pure HOCl is placed in a 2.0-L ﬂask.
49. At 1100 K, Kp  0.25 for the reaction

2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2SO3 1g2

Calculate the equilibrium partial pressures of SO2, O2, and SO3
produced from an initial mixture in which PSO2  PO2  0.50 atm
and PSO3  0. (Hint: If you don’t have a graphing calculator, then

Exercises
use the method of successive approximations to solve, as discussed
in Appendix 1.4.)
50. At a particular temperature, Kp  0.25 for the reaction
N2O4 1g2 ∆ 2NO2 1g2

a. A ﬂask containing only N2O4 at an initial pressure of 4.5 atm
is allowed to reach equilibrium. Calculate the equilibrium partial pressures of the gases.
b. A ﬂask containing only NO2 at an initial pressure of 9.0 atm
is allowed to reach equilibrium. Calculate the equilibrium partial pressures of the gases.
c. From your answers to parts a and b, does it matter from which
direction an equilibrium position is reached?
51. At 35°C, K  1.6  105 for the reaction

2NOCl1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2

Calculate the concentrations of all species at equilibrium for each
of the following original mixtures.
a. 2.0 mol pure NOCl in a 2.0-L ﬂask
b. 1.0 mol NOCl and 1.0 mol NO in a 1.0-L ﬂask
c. 2.0 mol NOCl and 1.0 mol Cl2 in a 1.0-L ﬂask
52. At a particular temperature, K  4.0  107 for the reaction
N2O4 1g2 ∆ 2NO2 1g2

In an experiment, 1.0 mol N2O4 is placed in a 10.0-L vessel. Calculate the concentrations of N2O4 and NO2 when this reaction
reaches equilibrium.
53. At a particular temperature, K  2.0  106 for the reaction
2CO2 1g2 ∆ 2CO1g2  O2 1g2

If 2.0 mol CO2 is initially placed into a 5.0-L vessel, calculate the
equilibrium concentrations of all species.
54. Lexan is a plastic used to make compact discs, eyeglass lenses,
and bullet-proof glass. One of the compounds used to make Lexan
is phosgene (COCl2 2, an extremely poisonous gas. Phosgene
decomposes by the reaction
COCl2 1g2 ∆ CO1g2  Cl2 1g2
for which Kp  6.8  109 at 100C. If pure phosgene at an initial pressure of 1.0 atm decomposes, calculate the equilibrium
pressures of all species.
55. At 25°C, Kp  2.9  103 for the reaction

NH4OCONH2 1s2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2  CO2 1g2

In an experiment carried out at 25°C, a certain amount of
NH4OCONH2 is placed in an evacuated rigid container and allowed to come to equilibrium. Calculate the total pressure in the
container at equilibrium.
56. A sample of solid ammonium chloride was placed in an evacuated container and then heated so that it decomposed to ammonia gas and hydrogen chloride gas. After heating, the total pressure in the container was found to be 4.4 atm. Calculate Kp at this
temperature for the decomposition reaction
NH4Cl1s2 ∆ NH3 1g2  HCl1g2

617

Le Châtelier’s Principle
57. Suppose the reaction system
UO2 1s2  4HF1g2 ∆ UF4 1g2  2H2O1g2
has already reached equilibrium. Predict the effect that each of
the following changes will have on the equilibrium position. Tell
whether the equilibrium will shift to the right, will shift to the left,
or will not be affected.
a. Additional UO2 (s) is added to the system.
b. The reaction is performed in a glass reaction vessel; HF1g2
attacks and reacts with glass.
c. Water vapor is removed.
58. Predict the shift in the equilibrium position that will occur for
each of the following reactions when the volume of the reaction
container is increased.
a. N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
b. PCl5 1g2 ∆ PCl3 1g2  Cl2 1g2
c. H2 1g2  F2 1g2 ∆ 2HF1g2
d. COCl2 1g2 ∆ CO1g2  Cl2 1g2
e. CaCO3 1s2 ∆ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2
59. An important reaction in the commercial production of hydrogen is
CO1g2  H2O1g2 ∆ H2 1g2  CO2 1g2
How will this system at equilibrium shift in each of the ﬁve
following cases?
a. Gaseous carbon dioxide is removed.
b. Water vapor is added.
c. The pressure is increased by adding helium gas.
d. The temperature is increased (the reaction is exothermic).
e. The pressure is increased by decreasing the volume of the
reaction container.
60. What will happen to the number of moles of SO3 in equilibrium
with SO2 and O2 in the reaction
2SO3 1g2 ∆ 2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2

¢H°  197 kJ

in each of the following cases?
a. Oxygen gas is added.
b. The pressure is increased by decreasing the volume of the reaction container.
c. The pressure is increased by adding argon gas.
d. The temperature is decreased.
e. Gaseous sulfur dioxide is removed.
61. In which direction will the position of the equilibrium
2HI1g2 ∆ H2 1g2  I2 1g2
be shifted for each of the following changes?
a. H2 1g2 is added.
b. I2 1g2 is removed.
c. HI1g2 is removed.
d. Some Ar1g2 is added.
e. The volume of the container is doubled.
f. The temperature is decreased (the reaction is exothermic).
62. Hydrogen for use in ammonia production is produced by the
reaction
CH4 1g2  H2O1g2 w88888888
88888888x CO1g2  3H2 1g2
Ni catalyst
750C

618

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

What will happen to a reaction mixture at equilibrium if
a. H2O1g2 is removed?
b. the temperature is increased (the reaction is endothermic)?
c. an inert gas is added?
d. CO1g2 is removed?
e. the volume of the container is tripled?
63. Old-fashioned “smelling salts” consist of ammonium carbonate,
(NH4 ) 2CO3. The reaction for the decomposition of ammonium
carbonate
1NH4 2 2CO3 1s2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2  CO2 1g2  H2O1g2
is endothermic. Would the smell of ammonia increase or decrease
as the temperature is increased?
64. Ammonia is produced by the Haber process, in which nitrogen
and hydrogen are reacted directly using an iron mesh impregnated
with oxides as a catalyst. For the reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
equilibrium constants (Kp values) as a function of temperature are
300°C, 4.34  103
500°C, 1.45  105
600°C, 2.25  106

65. Calculate a value for the equilibrium constant for the reaction
O2 1g2  O1g2 ∆ O3 1g2
given
O3 1g2  NO1g2 ∆ NO2 1g2  O2 1g2

Calculate the concentrations of Fe3 , SCN, and FeSCN2 in a
solution that is initially 2.0 M FeSCN2 .
69. For the reaction
PCl5 1g2 ∆ PCl3 1g2  Cl2 1g2
at 600. K, the equilibrium constant, Kp, is 11.5. Suppose that
2.450 g of PCl5 is placed in an evacuated 500.-mL bulb, which is
then heated to 600. K.
a. What would be the pressure of PCl5 if it did not dissociate?
b. What is the partial pressure of PCl5 at equilibrium?
c. What is the total pressure in the bulb at equilibrium?
d. What is the degree of dissociation of PCl5 at equilibrium?
70. At 25°C, gaseous SO2Cl2 decomposes to SO2 (g) and Cl2 (g) to
the extent that 12.5% of the original SO2Cl2 (by moles) has decomposed to reach equilibrium. The total pressure (at equilibrium)
is 0.900 atm. Calculate the value of Kp for this system.
71. For the following reaction at a certain temperature

it is found that the equilibrium concentrations in a 5.00-L
rigid container are [H2 ]  0.0500 M, [F2 ]  0.0100 M, and
[HF]  0.400 M. If 0.200 mol of F2 is added to this equilibrium
mixture, calculate the concentrations of all gases once equilibrium
is reestablished.
72. Consider the reaction

Additional Exercises

hv

FeSCN2 1aq2 ∆ Fe3 1aq2  SCN 1aq2

H2 1g2  F2 1g2 ∆ 2HF1g2

Is the reaction exothermic or endothermic?

NO2 1g2 ∆ NO1g2  O1g2

68 At a certain temperature, K  9.1  104 for the reaction

K  6.8  1049
K  5.8  1034

Hint: When reactions are added together, the equilibrium expressions are multiplied.
66. At 25°C, Kp  1  1031 for the reaction
N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2

a. Calculate the concentration of NO, in molecules/cm3, that can
exist in equilibrium in air at 25°C. In air, PN2  0.8 atm and
PO2  0.2 atm.
b. Typical concentrations of NO in relatively pristine environments range from 108 to 1010 molecules/cm3. Why is there
a discrepancy between these values and your answer to
part a?
67. The gas arsine, AsH3, decomposes as follows:
2AsH3 1g2 ∆ 2As1s2  3H2 1g2

In an experiment at a certain temperature, pure AsH3 (g) was
placed in an empty, rigid, sealed ﬂask at a pressure of 392.0 torr.
After 48 hours the pressure in the ﬂask was observed to be constant at 488.0 torr.
a. Calculate the equilibrium pressure of H2 (g)
b. Calculate Kp for this reaction.

Fe3 1aq2  SCN 1aq2 ∆ FeSCN2 1aq2
How will the equilibrium position shift if
a. water is added, doubling the volume?
b. AgNO3 1aq2 is added? (AgSCN is insoluble.)
c. NaOH1aq2 is added? 3Fe1OH2 3 is insoluble.]
d. Fe1NO3 2 3 1aq2 is added?
73. Chromium(VI) forms two different oxyanions, the orange dichromate ion, Cr2O72, and the yellow chromate ion, CrO42. (See the
following photos.) The equilibrium reaction between the two
ions is
Cr2O721aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ 2CrO421aq2  2H1aq2
Explain why orange dichromate solutions turn yellow when
sodium hydroxide is added.

Challenge Problems
74. The synthesis of ammonia gas from nitrogen gas and hydrogen
gas represents a classic case in which a knowledge of kinetics and
equilibrium was used to make a desired chemical reaction economically feasible. Explain how each of the following conditions
helps to maximize the yield of ammonia.
a. running the reaction at an elevated temperature
b. removing the ammonia from the reaction mixture as it forms
c. using a catalyst
d. running the reaction at high pressure
75. Suppose K  4.5  103 at a certain temperature for the reaction
PCl5 1g2 ∆ PCl3 1g2  Cl2 1g2

If it is found that the concentration of PCl5 is twice the concentration of PCl3, what must be the concentration of Cl2 under these
conditions?
76. For the reaction below, Kp  1.16 at 800.°C.
CaCO3 1s2 ∆ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2

If a 20.0-g sample of CaCO3 is put into a 10.0-L container and
heated to 800.°C, what percentage by mass of the CaCO3 will
react to reach equilibrium?
77. A 2.4156-g sample of PCl5 was placed in an empty 2.000-L ﬂask
and allowed to decompose to PCl3 and Cl2 at 250.0°C:
PCl5 1g2 ∆ PCl3 1g2  Cl2 1g2

At equilibrium the total pressure inside the ﬂask was observed to
be 358.7 torr. Calculate the partial pressure of each gas at equilibrium and the value of Kp at 250.0°C.
78. Consider the decomposition of the compound C5H6O3 as follows:
C5H6O3 1g2 ¡ C2H6 1g2  3CO1g2

When a 5.63-g sample of pure C5H6O3 1g2 was sealed into an
otherwise empty 2.50-L ﬂask and heated to 200.°C, the pressure
in the ﬂask gradually rose to 1.63 atm and remained at that value.
Calculate K for this reaction.

Challenge Problems
79. At 35°C, K  1.6  105 for the reaction

2NOCl1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2  Cl2 1g2

If 2.0 mol NO and 1.0 mol Cl2 are placed into a 1.0-L ﬂask, calculate the equilibrium concentrations of all species.
80. Nitric oxide and bromine at initial partial pressures of 98.4 and
41.3 torr, respectively, were allowed to react at 300. K. At equilibrium the total pressure was 110.5 torr. The reaction is
2NO1g2  Br2 1g2 ∆ 2NOBr1g2
a. Calculate the value of Kp.
b. What would be the partial pressures of all species if NO and
Br2, both at an initial partial pressure of 0.30 atm, were allowed to come to equilibrium at this temperature?
81. At 25°C, Kp  5.3  105 for the reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2

When a certain partial pressure of NH3 1g2 is put into an otherwise empty rigid vessel at 25°C, equilibrium is reached when

619

50.0% of the original ammonia has decomposed. What was the
original partial pressure of ammonia before any decomposition
occurred?
82. Consider the reaction
P4 1g2 ¡ 2P2 1g2
where Kp  1.00  101 at 1325 K. In an experiment where
P4 (g) is placed into a container at 1325 K, the equilibrium
mixture of P4 (g) and P2 (g2 has a total pressure of 1.00 atm.
Calculate the equilibrium pressures of P4 (g) and P2 (g). Calculate the fraction (by moles) of P4 (g) that has dissociated to reach
equilibrium.
83. The partial pressures of an equilibrium mixture of N2O4 (g) and
NO2 (g) are PN2O4  0.34 atm and PNO2  1.20 atm at a certain
temperature. The volume of the container is doubled. Find the
partial pressures of the two gases when a new equilibrium is
established.
84. At 125C, Kp  0.25 for the reaction
2NaHCO3 1s2 ∆ Na2CO3 1s2  CO2 1g2  H2O1g2

A 1.00-L ﬂask containing 10.0 g NaHCO3 is evacuated and heated
to 125°C.
a. Calculate the partial pressures of CO2 and H2O after equilibrium is established.
b. Calculate the masses of NaHCO3 and Na2CO3 present at equilibrium.
c. Calculate the minimum container volume necessary for all of
the NaHCO3 to decompose.
85. An 8.00-g sample of SO3 was placed in an evacuated container,
where it decomposed at 600°C according to the following reaction:
SO3 1g2 ∆ SO2 1g2  12 O2 1g2
At equilibrium the total pressure and the density of the gaseous
mixture were 1.80 atm and 1.60 g/L, respectively. Calculate Kp
for this reaction.
86. A sample of iron(II) sulfate was heated in an evacuated container
to 920 K, where the following reactions occurred:
2FeSO4 1s2 ∆ Fe2O3 1s2  SO3 1g2  SO2 1g2
SO3 1g2 ∆ SO2 1g2  12 O2 1g2

After equilibrium was reached, the total pressure was 0.836 atm
and the partial pressure of oxygen was 0.0275 atm. Calculate Kp
for each of these reactions.
87. At 5000 K and 1.000 atm, 83.00% of the oxygen molecules in a
sample have dissociated to atomic oxygen. At what pressure will
95.0% of the molecules dissociate at this temperature?
88. A sample of N2O4 (g) is placed in an empty cylinder at 25°C. After
equilibrium is reached the total pressure is 1.5 atm and 16% (by
moles) of the original N2O4 (g) has dissociated to NO2 (g).
a. Calculate the value of Kp for this dissociation reaction at 25°C.
b. If the volume of the cylinder is increased until the total pressure is 1.0 atm (the temperature of the system remains constant), calculate the equilibrium pressure of N2O4 (g) and
NO2 (g).
c. What percentage (by moles) of the original N2O4 (g) is dissociated at the new equilibrium position (total pressure  1.00
atm)?

620

Chapter Thirteen Chemical Equilibrium

89. A sample of gaseous nitrosyl bromide, NOBr, was placed in a
rigid ﬂask, where it decomposed at 25°C according to the following reaction:
2NOBr1g2 ∆ 2NO1g2  Br2 1g2
At equilibrium the total pressure and the density of the gaseous
mixture were found to be 0.0515 atm and 0.1861 g/L, respectively. Calculate the value of Kp for this reaction.
90. The equilibrium constant Kp for the reaction
CCl4 1g2 ∆ C1s2  2Cl2 1g2

at 700°C is 0.76 atm. Determine the initial pressure of carbon
tetrachloride that will produce a total equilibrium pressure of
1.20 atm at 700°C.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

91. For the reaction
NH3 1g2  H2S1g2 ∆ NH4HS1s2
K  400. at 35.0°C. If 2.00 mol each of NH3, H2S, and NH4HS
are placed in a 5.00-L vessel, what mass of NH4HS will be present at equilibrium? What is the pressure of H2S at equilibrium?
92. Given K  3.50 at 45°C for the reaction
A1g2  B1g2 ÷ C1g2
and K  7.10 at 45°C for the reaction
2A1g2  D1g2 ÷ C1g2
what is the value of K at the same temperature for the reaction
C1g2  D1g2 ÷ 2B1g2
What is the value of Kp at 45°C for the reaction? Starting with
1.50 atm partial pressures of both C and D, what is the mole fraction of B once equilibrium is reached?
93. The hydrocarbon naphthalene was frequently used in mothballs
until recently, when it was discovered that human inhalation of
naphthalene vapors can lead to hemolytic anemia. Naphthalene is
93.71% carbon by mass and a 0.256-mol sample of naphthalene
has a mass of 32.8 g. What is the molecular formula of naphthalene? This compound works as a pesticide in mothballs by

sublimation of the solid so that it fumigates enclosed spaces with
its vapors according to the equation
naphthalene1s2 ÷ naphthalene1g2

K  4.29  106 1at 298 K2

If 3.00 g of solid naphthalene is placed into an enclosed space
with a volume of 5.00 L at 25°C, what percentage of the naphthalene will have sublimed once equilibrium has been established?

Marathon Problem*
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

94. Consider the reaction
A1g2  B1g2 ∆ C1g2
for which K  1.30  102. Assume that 0.406 mol C(g) is placed
in the cylinder represented below. The temperature is 300.0 K,
and the barometric pressure on the piston (which is assumed to
be massless and frictionless) is constant at 1.00 atm. The original
volume (before the 0.406 mol C(g) begins to decompose) is
10.00 L. What is the volume in the cylinder at equilibrium?
P = 1.00 atm

Original volume = 10.00 L
T = 300.0 K
0.406 mole of
pure C(g) (initially)

Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 68,
No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of Chemical
Education, Inc.

14 Acids and Bases
Contents
14.1 The Nature of Acids and
Bases
14.2 Acid Strength
• Water as an Acid and a Base
14.3 The pH Scale
14.4 Calculating the pH of
Strong Acid Solutions
14.5 Calculating the pH of
Weak Acid Solutions
• The pH of a Mixture of
Weak Acids
• Percent Dissociation
14.6 Bases
14.7 Polyprotic Acids
• Phosphoric Acid
• Sulfuric Acid
14.8 Acid–Base Properties of
Salts
• Salts That Produce Neutral
Solutions
• Salts That Produce Basic
Solutions
• Base Strength in Aqueous
Solutions
• Salts That Produce Acidic
Solutions
14.9 The Effect of Structure on
Acid–Base Properties
14.10 Acid–Base Properties of
Oxides
14.11 The Lewis Acid–Base Model
14.12 Strategy for Solving
Acid–Base Problems:
A Summary

This grass pink orchid thrives in the acidic soil of a bog meadow at Illinois Beach State Park.

622

I

n this chapter we reencounter two very important classes of compounds, acids and
bases. We will explore their interactions and apply the fundamentals of chemical equilibria
discussed in Chapter 13 to systems involving proton-transfer reactions.
Acid–base chemistry is important in a wide variety of everyday applications. There
are complex systems in our bodies that carefully control the acidity of our blood, since
even small deviations may lead to serious illness and death. The same sensitivity exists
in other life forms. If you have ever had tropical ﬁsh or goldﬁsh, you know how important
it is to monitor and control the acidity of the water in the aquarium.
Acids and bases are also important in industry. For example, the vast quantity of sulfuric acid manufactured in the United States each year is needed to produce fertilizers,
polymers, steel, and many other materials.
The inﬂuence of acids on living things has assumed special importance in the United
States, Canada, and Europe in recent years as a result of the phenomenon of acid rain (see
the Chemical Impact in Chapter 5). This problem is complex and has diplomatic and economic overtones that make it all the more difﬁcult to solve.

14.1
Don’t taste chemicals!
Acids and bases were ﬁrst discussed in
Section 4.2.

The Nature of Acids and Bases

Acids were ﬁrst recognized as a class of substances that taste sour. Vinegar tastes sour because it is a dilute solution of acetic acid; citric acid is responsible for the sour taste of a
lemon. Bases, sometimes called alkalis, are characterized by their bitter taste and slippery
feel. Commercial preparations for unclogging drains are highly basic.
The ﬁrst person to recognize the essential nature of acids and bases was Svante
Arrhenius. Based on his experiments with electrolytes, Arrhenius postulated that acids
produce hydrogen ions in aqueous solution, while bases produce hydroxide ions. At the
time, the Arrhenius concept of acids and bases was a major step forward in quantifying
acid–base chemistry, but this concept is limited because it applies only to aqueous solutions and allows for only one kind of base—the hydroxide ion. A more general deﬁnition
of acids and bases was suggested by the Danish chemist Johannes Brønsted (1879–1947)
and the English chemist Thomas Lowry (1874–1936). In terms of the Brønsted–Lowry
model, an acid is a proton (H) donor, and a base is a proton acceptor. For example,
when gaseous HCl dissolves in water, each HCl molecule donates a proton to a water molecule and so qualiﬁes as a Brønsted–Lowry acid. The molecule that accepts the proton,
in this case water, is a Brønsted–Lowry base.
To understand how water can act as a base, we need to remember that the oxygen
of the water molecule has two unshared electron pairs, either of which can form a
covalent bond with an H ion. When gaseous HCl dissolves, the following reaction
occurs:
O
HOO
OS HO ClS
Q
A
H

HOO
OOH
A
H



OS
 S Cl
Q



Note that the proton is transferred from the HCl molecule to the water molecule to form
H3O, which is called the hydronium ion. This reaction is represented in Fig. 14.1 using molecular models.

623

624

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

Common household substances that contain
acids and bases. Vinegar is a dilute solution
of acetic acid. Drain cleaners contain strong
bases such as sodium hydroxide.

The general reaction that occurs when an acid is dissolved in water can best be represented as
HA1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H3O 1aq2  A 1aq2

Recall that (aq) means the substance is
hydrated.

Visualization: Acid Ionization
Equilibrium

Acid

Base

FIGURE 14.1
The reaction of HCl and H2O.

(14.1)

Conjugate
base

This representation emphasizes the signiﬁcant role of the polar water molecule in pulling
the proton from the acid. Note that the conjugate base is everything that remains of the
acid molecule after a proton is lost. The conjugate acid is formed when the proton is
transferred to the base. A conjugate acid–base pair consists of two substances related to
each other by the donating and accepting of a single proton. In Equation (14.1) there are
two conjugate acid–base pairs: HA and A and H2O and H3O. This reaction is represented by molecular models in Fig. 14.2.
It is important to note that Equation (14.1) really represents a competition for the proton between the two bases H2O and A. If H2O is a much stronger base than A, that is,
if H2O has a much greater afﬁnity for H than does A, the equilibrium position will be
far to the right; most of the acid dissolved will be in the ionized form. Conversely, if A
is a much stronger base than H2O, the equilibrium position will lie far to the left. In this
case most of the acid dissolved will be present at equilibrium as HA.
The equilibrium expression for the reaction given in Equation (14.1) is
Ka 

In this chapter we will always represent
an acid as simply dissociating. This does
not mean we are using the Arrhenius
model for acids. Since water does not
affect the equilibrium position, it is
simply easier to leave it out of the acid
dissociation reaction.

Conjugate
acid

3H3O 4 3 A 4
3H 4 3A 4

3HA4
3HA4

(14.2)

where Ka is called the acid dissociation constant. Both H3O(aq) and H(aq) are commonly used to represent the hydrated proton. In this book we will often use simply H,
but you should remember that it is hydrated in aqueous solutions.
In Chapter 13 we saw that the concentration of a pure solid or a pure liquid is always
omitted from the equilibrium expression. In a dilute solution we can assume that the

+

+

–

+

14.1 The Nature of Acids and Bases

FIGURE 14.2
The reaction of an acid HA with water to
form H3O and a conjugate base A.

+

+

625

–

+

concentration of liquid water remains essentially constant when an acid is dissolved. Thus
the term [H2O] is not included in Equation (14.2), and the equilibrium expression for Ka
has the same form as that for the simple dissociation into ions:
HA1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  A 1aq2
You should not forget, however, that water plays an important role in causing the acid
to ionize.
Note that Ka is the equilibrium constant for the reaction in which a proton is removed
from HA to form the conjugate base A. We use Ka to represent only this type of reaction. Knowing this, you can write the Ka expression for any acid, even one that is totally
unfamiliar to you. As you do Sample Exercise 14.1, focus on the deﬁnition of the reaction corresponding to Ka.
Sample Exercise 14.1

Acid Dissociation (Ionization) Reactions
Write the simple dissociation (ionization) reaction (omitting water) for each of the following acids.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Hydrochloric acid (HCl)
Acetic acid (HC2H3O2)
The ammonium ion (NH4)
The anilinium ion (C6H5NH3)
The hydrated aluminum(III) ion [Al(H2O)6]3

Solution
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

HCl1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  Cl 1aq2
HC2H3O2 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C2H3O2 1aq2
NH4 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  NH3 1aq2
C6H5NH3 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C6H5NH2 1aq2
Although this formula looks complicated, writing the reaction is simple if you concentrate on the meaning of Ka. Removing a proton, which can come only from one of
the water molecules, leaves one OH and ﬁve H2O molecules attached to the Al3 ion.
So the reaction is
Al1H2O2 63 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  Al1H2O2 5OH2 1aq2
See Exercises 14.27 and 14.28.

The Brønsted–Lowry model is not limited to aqueous solutions; it can be extended
to reactions in the gas phase. For example, we discussed the reaction between gaseous
hydrogen chloride and ammonia when we studied diffusion (Section 5.7):
NH3 1g2  HCl1g2 ∆ NH4Cl1s2
In this reaction, a proton is donated by the hydrogen chloride to the ammonia, as shown
by these Lewis structures:

When HCl( g) and NH3( g) meet in a tube, a
white ring of NH4Cl(s) forms.

H
A
OS
HONS HO Cl
Q
A
H


H
A

OS
HONOH S Cl
Q
A
H

626

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

FIGURE 14.3
The reaction of NH3 with HCl to form
NH4  and Cl  .

+

+

–

+

Note that this is not considered an acid–base reaction according to the Arrhenius concept.
Figure 14.3 shows a molecular representation of this reaction.

14.2

Acid Strength

The strength of an acid is deﬁned by the equilibrium position of its dissociation (ionization) reaction:
HA1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H3O 1aq2  A 1aq2
A strong acid has a weak conjugate
base.

A strong acid is one for which this equilibrium lies far to the right. This means that
almost all the original HA is dissociated (ionized) at equilibrium [see Fig. 14.4(a)]. There
is an important connection between the strength of an acid and that of its conjugate base.
A strong acid yields a weak conjugate base—one that has a low afﬁnity for a proton. A
strong acid also can be described as an acid whose conjugate base is a much weaker base
than water (see Fig. 14.5). In this case the water molecules win the competition for the
H ions.

Before dissociation

After dissociation,
at equilibrium

Relative
conjugate
base
strength

Very
strong

Very
weak

Strong

H+ A–

HA

Relative
acid
strength

Weak

Weak
(a)
HA

HA

Strong

Very
weak

H+ A–
(b)

FIGURE 14.4
Graphic representation of the behavior
of acids of different strengths in
aqueous solution. (a) A strong acid.
(b) A weak acid.

Very
strong

FIGURE 14.5
The relationship of acid strength and conjugate base strength for the reaction
HA(aq)  H2O(l) ∆ H3O(aq)  A(aq)
Acid

Conjugate
base

14.2 Acid Strength

TABLE 14.1

 means much less than.
 means much greater than.

Perchloric acid can explode if handled
improperly.

627

Various Ways to Describe Acid Strength

Property

Strong Acid

Weak Acid

Ka value
Position of the dissociation
(ionization) equilibrium
Equilibrium concentration of
H  compared with original
concentration of HA
Strength of conjugate base
compared with that of water

Ka is large
Far to the right

Ka is small
Far to the left

3H 4  3HA 4 0

3H 4  3HA4 0

A much weaker
base than H2O

A much stronger
base than H2O

Conversely, a weak acid is one for which the equilibrium lies far to the left. Most of
the acid originally placed in the solution is still present as HA at equilibrium. That is, a
weak acid dissociates only to a very small extent in aqueous solution [see Fig. 14.4(b)].
In contrast to a strong acid, a weak acid has a conjugate base that is a much stronger base
than water. In this case a water molecule is not very successful in pulling an H ion from
the conjugate base. The weaker the acid, the stronger its conjugate base.
The various ways of describing the strength of an acid are summarized in Table 14.1.
Strong and weak acids are represented pictorially in Fig. 14.6.
The common strong acids are sulfuric acid [H2SO4 (aq)] , hydrochloric acid [HCl(aq)],
nitric acid [HNO3 (aq)] , and perchloric acid [HClO4 (aq)] . Sulfuric acid is actually a
diprotic acid, an acid having two acidic protons. The acid H2SO4 is a strong acid, virtually 100% dissociated (ionized) in water:
H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ H 1aq2  HSO4 1aq2
The HSO4 ion, however, is a weak acid:

HSO4 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  SO42 1aq2

Sulfuric acid
(H2SO4)

Most acids are oxyacids, in which the acidic proton is attached to an oxygen atom.
The strong acids mentioned above, except hydrochloric acid, are typical examples. Many
common weak acids, such as phosphoric acid (H3PO4), nitrous acid (HNO2), and

H+
Nitric acid
(HNO3)

Perchloric acid
(HClO4)

A–
B–

FIGURE 14.6
(a) A strong acid HA is completely ionized in water. (b) A weak acid HB exists
mostly as undissociated HB molecules in water. Note that the water molecules
are not shown in this ﬁgure.

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

TABLE 14.2

Phosphoric acid
(H3PO4)

Nitrous acid
(HNO2)

Values of Ka for Some Common Monoprotic Acids

Formula

Name

Value of Ka*

HSO4
HClO2
HC2H2ClO2
HF
HNO2
HC2H3O2
[Al(H2O)6 ] 3
HOCl
HCN
NH4
HOC6H5

Hydrogen sulfate ion
Chlorous acid
Monochloracetic acid
Hydroﬂuoric acid
Nitrous acid
Acetic acid
Hydrated aluminum(III) ion
Hypochlorous acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Ammonium ion
Phenol

1.2  10 2
1.2  102
1.35  10 3
7.2  104
4.0  104
1.8  105
1.4  105
3.5  108
6.2  1010
5.6  10 10
1.6  10 10

h
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
6

Increasing acid strength

628

*The units of Ka are customarily omitted.

hypochlorous acid (HOCl), are also oxyacids. Organic acids, those with a carbon atom
backbone, commonly contain the carboxyl group:
O
C

Hypochlorous acid
(HOCl)

Acidic H
Acetic acid
(CH3CO2H)

O

H

Acids of this type are usually weak. Examples are acetic acid (CH3COOH), often written
HC2H3O2, and benzoic acid (C6H5COOH). Note that the remainder of the hydrogens in
these molecules are not acidic—they do not form H in water.
There are some important acids in which the acidic proton is attached to an atom
other than oxygen. The most signiﬁcant of these are the hydrohalic acids HX, where X
represents a halogen atom.
Table 14.2 contains a list of common monoprotic acids (those having one acidic
proton) and their Ka values. Note that the strong acids are not listed. When a strong acid
molecule such as HCl, for example, is placed in water, the position of the dissociation
equilibrium
HCl1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  Cl 1aq2
lies so far to the right that [HCl] cannot be measured accurately. This prevents an accurate calculation of Ka:
Ka 

Acidic H

8n

Benzoic acid
(C6H5CO2H)

3H 4 3Cl 4
3HCl4

Very small and
highly uncertain

Appendix 5.1 contains a table of K a values.

Sample Exercise 14.2

Relative Base Strength
Using Table 14.2, arrange the following species according to their strengths as bases: H2O,
F, Cl, NO2, and CN.
Solution
Remember that water is a stronger base than the conjugate base of a strong acid but a
weaker base than the conjugate base of a weak acid. This leads to the following order:
Cl 6 H2O 6 conjugate bases of weak acids
Weakest bases ¡ Strongest bases

14.2 Acid Strength

629

We can order the remaining conjugate bases by recognizing that the strength of an acid
is inversely related to the strength of its conjugate base. Since from Table 14.2 we have
Ka for HF 7 Ka for HNO2 7 Ka for HCN
the base strengths increase as follows:
F 6 NO2 6 CN
The combined order of increasing base strength is
Cl 6 H2O 6 F 6 NO2 6 CN
See Exercises 14.33 through 14.36.

Water as an Acid and a Base
A substance is said to be amphoteric if it can behave either as an acid or as a base. Water
is the most common amphoteric substance. We can see this clearly in the autoionization
of water, which involves the transfer of a proton from one water molecule to another to
produce a hydroxide ion and a hydronium ion:
H
G
G
O 
O
D
D
H
H
S

S

H

S

S

H2O  H2O ∆ H3O   OH 
acid(1) base(1)
acid(2) base(2)

O
O
?0/
H H H



OOH
 SO
Q



In this reaction, also illustrated in Fig. 14.7, one water molecule acts as an acid by furnishing a proton, and the other acts as a base by accepting the proton.
Autoionization can occur in other liquids besides water. For example, in liquid ammonia the autoionization reaction is

S



S

O
O
N
N
?0/  ? 0/
H H H H H H

H
A
N
?0/
H H H

N
D G

H
H



The autoionization reaction for water
2H2O1l2 ∆ H3O 1aq2  OH 1aq2
leads to the equilibrium expression
Kw  3H3O 4 3 OH 4  3H 4 3OH 4
where Kw, called the ion-product constant (or the dissociation constant for water),
always refers to the autoionization of water.
Experiment shows that at 25°C in pure water,
3 H 4  3OH 4  1.0  107 M
which means that at 25°C
Kw  3H 4 3OH 4  11.0  107 211.0  107 2
 1.0  1014

Kw  3 H 4 3 OH 4
 1.0  1014




FIGURE 14.7
Two water molecules react to form H3O 
and OH  .

+

+

+

–

630

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
It is important to recognize the meaning of Kw. In any aqueous solution at 25°C, no
matter what it contains, the product of [H] and [OH ] must always equal 1.0  1014.
There are three possible situations:
1. A neutral solution, where [H ]  [OH ].
2. An acidic solution, where [H ] 7 [OH ].
3. A basic solution, where [OH ] 7 [H ].
In each case, however, at 25°C,
Kw  3H 4 3 OH 4  1.0  1014

Sample Exercise 14.3

Calculating [H+] and [OH–]
Calculate [H] or [OH ] as required for each of the following solutions at 25°C, and state
whether the solution is neutral, acidic, or basic.
a. 1.0  105 M OH
b. 1.0  107 M OH
c. 10.0 M H
Solution
a. Kw  [H ][OH ]  1.0  1014. Since [OH ] is 1.0  105 M, solving for [H ]
gives
3H  4 

Visualization: Self-Ionization
of Water

1.0  1014
1.0  1014

 1.0  109 M

3OH 4
1.0  105

Since [OH ] 7 [H ] , the solution is basic.
b. As in part a, solving for [H ] gives
1.0  1014
1.0  1014

 1.0  107 M
3OH 4
1.0  107

3H 4 

Since [H ]  [OH ] , the solution is neutral.
c. Solving for [OH ] gives
3OH 4 

1.0  1014
1.0  1014

 1.0  1015 M

3H 4
10.0

Since [H ] 7 [OH ] , the solution is acidic.
See Exercises 14.37 and 14.38.
Since Kw is an equilibrium constant, it varies with temperature. The effect of temperature is considered in Sample Exercise 14.4.

Sample Exercise 14.4

Autoionization of Water
At 60°C, the value of Kw is 1  1013.
a. Using Le Châtelier’s principle, predict whether the reaction
2H2O1l2 ∆ H3O 1aq2  OH 1aq2
is exothermic or endothermic.
b. Calculate [H] and [OH ] in a neutral solution at 60°C.

14.3 The pH Scale

631

Solution
a. Kw increases from 1  1014 at 25°C to 1  1013 at 60°C. Le Châtelier’s principle
states that if a system at equilibrium is heated, it will adjust to consume energy. Since
the value of Kw increases with temperature, we must think of energy as a reactant, and
so the process must be endothermic.
b. At 60°C,
3H 4 3 OH 4  1  1013
For a neutral solution,
3H 4  3OH 4  21  1013  3  107 M
See Exercise 14.39.

Visualization: The pH Scale

14.3

The pH Scale


The pH scale is a compact way to
represent solution acidity.
Appendix 1.2 has a review of logs.

Because [H ] in an aqueous solution is typically quite small, the pH scale provides a convenient way to represent solution acidity. The pH is a log scale based on 10, where
pH  log 3H 4
Thus for a solution where
3H 4  1.0  107 M
pH  17.002  7.00
At this point we need to discuss signiﬁcant ﬁgures for logarithms. The rule is that the
number of decimal places in the log is equal to the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the
original number. Thus
2 signiﬁcant ﬁgures

哬

3H 4  1.0  109 M
pH  9.00

哭

2 decimal places

Similar log scales are used for representing other quantities; for example,
pOH  log3OH 4
pK  log K
Since pH is a log scale based on 10, the pH changes by 1 for every power of 10
change in [H]. For example, a solution of pH 3 has an H concentration 10 times that
of a solution of pH 4 and 100 times that of a solution of pH 5. Also note that because pH
is deﬁned as log[H ] , the pH decreases as [H ] increases. The pH scale and the pH
values for several common substances are shown in Fig. 14.8.
The pH of a solution is usually measured using a pH meter, an electronic device with
a probe that can be inserted into a solution of unknown pH. The probe contains an acidic
aqueous solution enclosed by a special glass membrane that allows migration of H ions.
If the unknown solution has a different pH from the solution in the probe, an electric potential results, which is registered on the meter (see Fig. 14.9).
Sample Exercise 14.5
The pH meter is discussed more fully in
Section 17.4.

Calculating pH and pOH
Calculate pH and pOH for each of the following solutions at 25°C.
a. 1.0  103 M OH
b. 1.0 M OH

632

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Arnold Beckman, Man of Science
rnold Beckman died at age 104 in May 2004. Beckman’s
leadership of science and business spans virtually the
entire twentieth century. He was born in 1900 in Cullom,
Illinois, a town of 500 people that had no electricity or telephones. Beckman says, “In Cullom we were forced to improvise. I think it was a good thing.”
The son of a blacksmith, Beckman had his interest in
science awakened at age nine. At that time, in the attic of
his house he discovered J. Dorman Steele’s Fourteen Weeks
in Chemistry, a book containing instructions for doing chemistry experiments. Beckman became so fascinated with
chemistry that his father built him a small “chemistry shed”
in the back yard for his tenth birthday.
Beckman’s interest in chemistry was fostered by his
high school teachers, and he eventually attended the University of Illinois, Urbana–Champaign. He graduated with

A

Arnold Beckman.

a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering in 1922 and
stayed one more year to get a master’s degree. He then
went to Caltech, where he earned a Ph.D. and became a
faculty member.

Solution

Basic

[H+]

pH

10–14

14

–13

10

13

10–12

12

–11

11

–10

10

10
10

10–9

9

–8

8

10

Neutral 10–7

7

–6

10

6

10–5

5

10–4

4

–3

10

3

10–2

2

–1

10

1

1

0

Acidic

3H 4 

b.

3OH 4 

1 M NaOH

Ammonia
(Household
cleaner)

Kw
1.0  1014
 1.0  1011 M
 
3OH 4
1.0  103
pH  log 3H 4  log 11.0  1011 2  11.00
pOH  log 3OH 4  log 11.0  103 2  3.00

a.

Kw
1.0  1014

 1.0  1014 M
3H 4
1.0
pH  log 3 H 4  log 11.02  0.00
pOH  log 3OH 4  log 11.0  1014 2  14.00
See Exercise 14.41.

Blood
Pure water
Milk

It is useful to consider the log form of the expression
Kw  3H 4 3OH 4

Vinegar
Lemon juice
Stomach acid

1 M HCl

FIGURE 14.8
The pH scale and pH values of some
common substances.

FIGURE 14.9
pH meters are used to measure acidity.

14.3 The pH Scale

Beckman was always known for his inventiveness. As
a youth he designed a pressurized fuel system for his Model
T Ford to overcome problems with its normal gravity feed
fuel system—you had to back it up steep hills to keep it from
starving for fuel. In 1927 he applied for his ﬁrst patent: a
buzzer to alert drivers that they were speeding.
In 1935 Beckman invented something that would
cause a revolution in scientiﬁc instrumentation. A college
friend who worked in a laboratory in the California citrus
industry needed an accurate, convenient way to measure
the acidity of orange juice. In response, Beckman invented
the pH meter, which he initially called the acidimeter. This
compact, sturdy device was an immediate hit. It signaled
a new era in scientiﬁc instrumentation. In fact, business
was so good that Beckman left Caltech to head his own
company.
Over the years Beckman invented many other devices,
including an improved potentiometer and an instrument for
measuring the light absorbed by molecules. At age 65 he retired as president of Beckman Instruments (headquartered
in Fullerton, California). After a merger the company be-

633

came Beckman Coulter; it had sales of more than $2 billion
in 2003.
After stepping down as president of Beckman Instruments, Beckman began a new career—donating his wealth
for the improvement of science. In 1984 he and Mabel, his
wife of 58 years, donated $40 million to his alma mater—
the University of Illinois—to fund the Beckman Institute.
The Beckmans have also funded many other research institutes, including one at Caltech, and formed a foundation that
currently gives $20 million each year to various scientiﬁc
endeavors.
Arnold Beckman was a man known for his incredible
creativity but even more he was recognized as a man of absolute integrity. Mr. Beckman has important words for us:
“Whatever you do, be enthusiastic about it.”

Note: You can see Arnold Beckman’s biography at the Chemical
Heritage Foundation Web site (http;//www.chemheritage.org).

That is,
log Kw  log 3H 4  log 3OH 4

log Kw  log3H 4  log 3OH 4

or

pKw  pH  pOH

Thus

(14.3)

Since Kw  1.0  1014,
pKw  log11.0  1014 2  14.00
Thus, for any aqueous solution at 25°C, pH and pOH add up to 14.00:
pH  pOH  14.00

Sample Exercise 14.6

(14.4)

Calculating pH
The pH of a sample of human blood was measured to be 7.41 at 25°C. Calculate pOH,
[H], and [OH ] for the sample.
Solution
Since pH  pOH  14.00,
pOH  14.00  pH  14.00  7.41  6.59


To ﬁnd [H ] we must go back to the deﬁnition of pH:
pH  log3H 4
Thus
7.41  log3H 4

or

log 3H 4  7.41

634

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
We need to know the antilog of 7.41. As shown in Appendix 1.2, taking the antilog is
the same as exponentiation; that is,

antilog1n2  log1 1n2

antilog1n2  10n
Since pH  log[H ] ,

pH  log 3H 4

and [H] can be calculated by taking the antilog of pH:
3H 4  antilog1pH2

In the present case,
3H 4  antilog1pH2  antilog17.412  107.41  3.9  108
Similarly, [OH ]  antilog(pOH) , and

3OH 4  antilog16.592  106.59  2.6  107 M
See Exercises 14.42 through 14.46.

Now that we have considered all the fundamental deﬁnitions relevant to acid–base solutions, we can proceed to a quantitative description of the equilibria present in these solutions.
The main reason that acid–base problems sometimes seem difﬁcult is that a typical aqueous
solution contains many components, so the problems tend to be complicated. However, you
can deal with these problems successfully if you use the following general strategies:
• Think chemistry. Focus on the solution components and their reactions. It will almost
always be possible to choose one reaction that is the most important.
• Be systematic. Acid–base problems require a step-by-step approach.
• Be ﬂexible. Although all acid–base problems are similar in many ways, important differences do occur. Treat each problem as a separate entity. Do not try to force a given
problem into matching any you have solved before. Look for both the similarities and
the differences.
• Be patient. The complete solution to a complicated problem cannot be seen immediately in all its detail. Pick the problem apart into its workable steps.
• Be conﬁdent. Look within the problem for the solution, and let the problem guide you. Assume that you can think it out. Do not rely on memorizing solutions to problems. In fact,
memorizing solutions is usually detrimental because you tend to try to force a new problem
to be the same as one you have seen before. Understand and think; don’t just memorize.

14.4
Common Strong Acids
HCl(aq)
HNO3(aq)
H2SO4(aq)
HClO4(aq)

Calculating the pH of Strong Acid Solutions

When we deal with acid–base equilibria, we must focus on the solution components and
their chemistry. For example, what species are present in a 1.0 M solution of HCl? Since
hydrochloric acid is a strong acid, we assume that it is completely dissociated. Thus, although the label on the bottle says 1.0 M HCl, the solution contains virtually no HCl molecules. Typically, container labels indicate the substance(s) used to make up the solution
but do not necessarily describe the solution components after dissolution. Thus a 1.0 M
HCl solution contains H and Cl ions rather than HCl molecules.
The next step in dealing with aqueous solutions is to determine which components
are signiﬁcant and which can be ignored. We need to focus on the major species, those
solution components present in relatively large amounts. In 1.0 M HCl, for example, the
major species are H, Cl, and H2O. Since this is a very acidic solution, OH is present

14.5 Calculating the pH of Weak Acid Solutions

Always write the major species present in
the solution.

635

only in tiny amounts and is classiﬁed as a minor species. In attacking acid–base problems, the importance of writing the major species in the solution as the ﬁrst step cannot
be overemphasized. This single step is the key to solving these problems successfully.
To illustrate the main ideas involved, let us calculate the pH of 1.0 M HCl. We ﬁrst
list the major species: H, Cl, and H2O. Since we want to calculate the pH, we will focus on those major species that can furnish H. Obviously, we must consider H from
the dissociation of HCl. However, H2O also furnishes H by autoionization, which is often represented by the simple dissociation reaction
H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2

The H  from the strong acid drives the
equilibrium H2O ∆ H   OH to
the left.

However, is autoionization an important source of H ions? In pure water at 25°C, [H]
is 107 M. In 1.0 M HCl solution, the water will produce even less than 1027 M H, since
by Le Châtelier’s principle the H from the dissociated HCl will drive the position of the
water equilibrium to the left. Thus the amount of H contributed by water is negligible
compared with the 1.0 M H from the dissociation of HCl. Therefore, we can say that
[H] in the solution is 1.0 M. The pH is then
pH  log3H 4  log11.02  0

Sample Exercise 14.7
In pure water, only 10
produced.

7



M H is

pH of Strong Acids
a. Calculate the pH of 0.10 M HNO3.
b. Calculate the pH of 1.0  1010 M HCl.
Solution

Major Species
H

a. Since HNO3 is a strong acid, the major species in solution are

+

NO3–
H 2O

H ,

NO3,

and H2O

The concentration of HNO3 is virtually zero, since the acid completely dissociates
in water. Also, [OH ] will be very small because the H ions from the acid will
drive the equilibrium
H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2
to the left. That is, this is an acidic solution where [H ]  [OH ] , so [OH ]  107 M.
The sources of H are
1. H from HNO3 (0.10 M)
2. H from H2O
The number of H ions contributed by the autoionization of water will be very small
compared with the 0.10 M contributed by the HNO3 and can be neglected. Since the
dissolved HNO3 is the only important source of H ions in this solution,
3H 4  0.10 M and

pH  log10.102  1.00

b. Normally, in an aqueous solution of HCl the major species are H, Cl, and H2O.
However, in this case the amount of HCl in solution is so small that it has no effect;
the only major species is H2O. Thus the pH will be that of pure water, or pH  7.00.
See Exercises 14.47 and 14.48.

14.5

Calculating the pH of Weak Acid Solutions

Since a weak acid dissolved in water can be viewed as a prototype of almost any equilibrium occurring in aqueous solution, we will proceed carefully and systematically.
Although some of the procedures we develop here may seem unnecessary, they will become

636

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

First, always write the major species
present in the solution.
Major Species
HF
H 2O

essential as the problems become more complicated. We will develop the necessary strategies by calculating the pH of a 1.00 M solution of HF (Ka  7.2  104).
The ﬁrst step, as always, is to write the major species in the solution. From its
small Ka value, we know that hydroﬂuoric acid is a weak acid and will be dissociated
only to a slight extent. Thus, when we write the major species, the hydroﬂuoric acid
will be represented in its dominant form, as HF. The major species in solution are HF
and H2O.
The next step (since this is a pH problem) is to decide which of the major species
can furnish H ions. Actually, both major species can do so:
HF1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  F 1aq2
H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2

Ka  7.2  104
Kw  1.0  1014

In aqueous solutions, however, typically one source of H can be singled out as dominant. By comparing Ka for HF with Kw for H2O, we see that hydroﬂuoric acid, although
weak, is still a much stronger acid than water. Thus we will assume that hydroﬂuoric acid
will be the dominant source of H. We will ignore the tiny contribution by water.
Therefore, it is the dissociation of HF that will determine the equilibrium concentration of H and hence the pH:
HF1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  F 1aq2
The equilibrium expression is
Ka  7.2  104 

3H 4 3F 4
3HF4

To solve the equilibrium problem, we follow the procedures developed in Chapter 13
for gas-phase equilibria. First, we list the initial concentrations, the concentrations before
the reaction of interest has proceeded to equilibrium. Before any HF dissociates, the concentrations of the species in the equilibrium are
3HF4 0  1.00 M

3F 4 0  0

3H 4 0  107 M  0

(Note that the zero value for [H ] 0 is an approximation, since we are neglecting the H
ions from the autoionization of water.)
The next step is to determine the change required to reach equilibrium. Since some
HF will dissociate to come to equilibrium (but this amount is presently unknown), we let
x be the change in the concentration of HF that is required to achieve equilibrium. That
is, we assume that x mol/L HF will dissociate to produce x mol/L H and x mol/L F as
the system adjusts to its equilibrium position. Now the equilibrium concentrations can be
deﬁned in terms of x:
3HF4  3HF4 0  x  1.00  x
3F 4  3F 4 0  x  0  x  x
3H 4  3H 4 0  x  0  x  x

Substituting these equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression gives
Ka  7.2  104 

3H 4 3F 4
1x21x2

3HF4
1.00  x

This expression produces a quadratic equation that can be solved using the quadratic formula, as for the gas-phase systems in Chapter 13. However, since Ka for HF is so small,
HF will dissociate only slightly, and x is expected to be small. This will allow us to simplify the calculation. If x is very small compared to 1.00, the term in the denominator can
be approximated as follows:
1.00  x  1.00

14.5 Calculating the pH of Weak Acid Solutions

637

The equilibrium expression then becomes
7.2  104 

1x21x2
1x21x2

1.00  x
1.00

which yields
x2  17.2  104 211.002  7.2  104
x  27.2  104  2.7  102
The validity of an approximation should
always be checked.

How valid is the approximation that [HF]  1.00 M? Because this question will arise
often in connection with acid–base equilibrium calculations, we will consider it carefully.
The validity of the approximation depends on how much accuracy we demand for the calculated value of [H]. Typically, the Ka values for acids are known to an accuracy of only
about  5% . It is reasonable therefore to apply this ﬁgure when determining the validity
of the approximation
3HA4 0  x  3HA4 0
We will use the following test. First, we calculate the value of x by making the
approximation
Ka 

x2
x2

3HA4 0  x
3HA4 0

x2  Ka 3HA4 0

where

and x  2Ka 3HA4 0

We then compare the sizes of x and [HA] 0. If the expression
x
 100%
3HA4 0
is less than or equal to 5%, the value of x is small enough that the approximation
3HA4 0  x  3HA4 0
will be considered valid.
In our example,
x  2.7  102 mol/L

3HA4 0  3HF4 0  1.00 mol/L
and

x
2.7  102
 100 
 100%  2.7%
3HA4 0
1.00

The approximation we made is considered valid, and the value of x calculated using that
approximation is acceptable. Thus
x  3H 4  2.7  102 M and

pH  log 12.7  102 2  1.57

This problem illustrates all the important steps for solving a typical equilibrium problem involving a weak acid. These steps are summarized as follows:

Solving Weak Acid Equilibrium Problems

➥ 1 List the major species in the solution.
➥ 2 Choose the species that can produce H, and write balanced equations for the
reactions producing H.

➥ 3
➥ 4

Using the values of the equilibrium constants for the reactions you have written, decide which equilibrium will dominate in producing H.
Write the equilibrium expression for the dominant equilibrium.

638

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

The Ka values for various weak acids are
given in Table 14.2 and in Appendix 5.1.

➥ 5
➥ 6
➥ 7
➥ 8
➥ 9
➥10
➥11

List the initial concentrations of the species participating in the dominant
equilibrium.
Deﬁne the change needed to achieve equilibrium; that is, deﬁne x.
Write the equilibrium concentrations in terms of x.
Substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression.
Solve for x the “easy” way, that is, by assuming that [HA]0  x ⬇ [HA]0.
Use the 5% rule to verify whether the approximation is valid.
Calculate [H] and pH.

We use this systematic approach in Sample Exercise 14.8.
Sample Exercise 14.8

Major Species
HOCl
H 2O

The pH of Weak Acids
The hypochlorite ion (OCl ) is a strong oxidizing agent often found in household bleaches
and disinfectants. It is also the active ingredient that forms when swimming pool water
is treated with chlorine. In addition to its oxidizing abilities, the hypochlorite ion has a
relatively high afﬁnity for protons (it is a much stronger base than Cl, for example) and
forms the weakly acidic hypochlorous acid (HOCl, Ka  3.5  108). Calculate the pH
of a 0.100 M aqueous solution of hypochlorous acid.
Solution

➥1

We list the major species. Since HOCl is a weak acid and remains mostly undissociated, the major species in a 0.100 M HOCl solution are
HOCl

➥2

and H2O



Both species can produce H :

HOCl1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  OCl 1aq2
H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2

Ka  3.5  108
Kw  1.0  1014

➥3

Since HOCl is a signiﬁcantly stronger acid than H2O, it will dominate in the production of H.

➥4

We therefore use the following equilibrium expression:
Ka  3.5  108 

➥5

Swimming pool water must be frequently
tested for pH and chlorine content.

3H 4 3 OCl 4
3HOCl4

The initial concentrations appropriate for this equilibrium are

3HOCl4 0  0.100 M
3OCl 4 0  0
3 H 4 0  0
(We neglect the contribution from H2O.)

➥6

Since the system will reach equilibrium by the dissociation of HOCl, let x be the
amount of HOCl (in mol/L) that dissociates in reaching equilibrium.

➥7

The equilibrium concentrations in terms of x are

➥8

Substituting these concentrations into the equilibrium expression gives

3HOCl4  3HOCl4 0  x  0.100  x
3OCl 4  3OCl 4 0  x  0  x  x
3H 4  3H 4 0  x  0  x  x

Ka  3.5  108 

1x21x2
0.100  x

14.5 Calculating the pH of Weak Acid Solutions

639

➥9

Since Ka is so small, we can expect a small value for x. Thus we make the approximation [HA] 0  x  [HA] 0, or 0.100  x  0.100, which leads to the expression
Ka  3.5  108 

x2
x2

0.100  x
0.100

Solving for x gives
x  5.9  105

➥10 The approximation 0.100  x  0.100 must be validated. To do this, we compare
x to [HOCl]0:
x
x
5.9  105
 100 
 100 
 100  0.059%
3HA4 0
3HOCl4 0
0.100
Since this value is much less than 5%, the approximation is considered valid.

➥11 We calculate [H] and pH:

3H 4  x  5.9  105 M

pH  4.23

and

See Exercises 14.53 through 14.55.

The pH of a Mixture of Weak Acids
The same systematic approach applies to
all solution equilibria.

Sample Exercise 14.9

Sometimes a solution contains two weak acids of very different strengths. This case is
considered in Sample Exercise 14.9. Note that the steps are again followed (though not
labeled).

The pH of Weak Acid Mixtures
Calculate the pH of a solution that contains 1.00 M HCN (Ka  6.2  1010 ) and
5.00 M HNO2 (Ka  4.0  104 ). Also calculate the concentration of cyanide ion (CN )
in this solution at equilibrium.
Solution
Since HCN and HNO2 are both weak acids and are largely undissociated, the major species
in the solution are

Major Species
HCN
HNO2
H 2O

HCN, HNO2,

and

H2O

All three of these components produce H:
HCN1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  CN 1aq2
HNO2 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  NO2 1aq2
H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2

Ka  6.2  1010
Ka  4.0  104
Kw  1.0  1014

A mixture of three acids might lead to a very complicated problem. However, the situation is greatly simpliﬁed by the fact that even though HNO2 is a weak acid, it is much
stronger than the other two acids present (as revealed by the K values). Thus HNO2 can
be assumed to be the dominant producer of H, and we will focus on the equilibrium
expression
Ka  4.0  104 

3H 4 3NO2 4
3HNO2 4

640

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
The initial concentrations, the deﬁnition of x, and the equilibrium concentrations are as
follows:
Initial
Concentration (mol/L)

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)

3 HNO2 4 0  5.00
3NO 2 4 0  0
3 H 4 0  0

3HNO2 4  5.00  x
3 NO2  4  x
3H  4  x

x mol/L HNO2
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¡
dissociates

It is convenient to represent these concentrations in the following shorthand form (called
an ICE table):
HNO2 1aq2

To avoid clutter we do not show the units
of concentration in the ICE tables. All
terms have units of mol/L.

Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

H 1aq2

∆

5.00
x
5.00  x



NO2 1aq2

0
x
x

0
x
x

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations in the equilibrium expression and making the
approximation that 5.00  x  5.00 give
Ka  4.0  104 

1x21x2
x2

5.00  x
5.00

We solve for x:
x  4.5  102
Using the 5% rule, we show that the approximation is valid:
x
4.5  102
 100 
 100  0.90%
3HNO2 4 0
5.00
Therefore,
3H 4  x  4.5  102 M and pH  1.35
We also want to calculate the equilibrium concentration of cyanide ion in this solution. The CN ions in this solution come from the dissociation of HCN:
HCN 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  CN 1aq2
Although the position of this equilibrium lies far to the left and does not contribute signiﬁcantly to [H], HCN is the only source of CN. Thus we must consider the extent of
the dissociation of HCN to calculate [CN ] . The equilibrium expression for the preceding reaction is
Ka  6.2  1010 

3H 4 3CN 4
3HCN4

We know [H] for this solution from the results of the ﬁrst part of the problem. It is important to understand that there is only one kind of H  in this solution. It does not matter from
which acid the H ions originate. The equilibrium [H] we need to insert into the HCN equilibrium expression is 4.5  102 M, even though the H was contributed almost entirely from
the dissociation of HNO2. What is [HCN] at equilibrium? We know [HCN] 0  1.00 M, and
since Ka for HCN is so small, a negligible amount of HCN will dissociate. Thus
3HCN4  3HCN4 0  amount of HCN dissociated  3HCN4 0  1.00 M

641

14.5 Calculating the pH of Weak Acid Solutions

Since [H] and [HCN] are known, we can ﬁnd [CN ] from the equilibrium expression:
3H 4 3 CN 4
14.5  102 2 3CN 4

3HCN4
1.00
10
16.2  10 211.002
3CN 4 
 1.4  108 M
4.5  102

Ka  6.2  1010 

Note the signiﬁcance of this result. Since [CN ]  1.4  108 M and HCN is the
only source of CN, this means that only 1.4  108 mol/L of HCN dissociated. This is
a very small amount compared with the initial concentration of HCN, which is exactly
what we would expect from its very small Ka value, and [HCN]  1.00 M as assumed.
See Exercises 14.61 and 14.62.

Percent Dissociation
Percent dissociation is also known as
percent ionization.

It is often useful to specify the amount of weak acid that has dissociated in achieving
equilibrium in an aqueous solution. The percent dissociation is deﬁned as follows:
Percent dissociation 

amount dissociated 1mol/L2
 100%
initial concentration 1mol/L2

(14.5)

For example, we found earlier that in a 1.00 M solution of HF, 3H 4  2.7  102 M. To
reach equilibrium, 2.7  102 mol/L of the original 1.00 M HF dissociates, so
Percent dissociation 

2.7  102 mol/L
 100%  2.7%
1.00 mol/L

For a given weak acid, the percent dissociation increases as the acid becomes more
dilute. For example, the percent dissociation of acetic acid (HC2H3O2, Ka  1.8  105)
is signiﬁcantly greater in a 0.10 M solution than in a 1.0 M solution, as demonstrated in
Sample Exercise 14.10.
Sample Exercise 14.10

Calculating Percent Dissociation
Calculate the percent dissociation of acetic acid (Ka  1.8  105 ) in each of the following solutions.
a. 1.00 M HC2H3O2
b. 0.100 M HC2H3O2
Solution

Major Species
HC2H3O2
H 2O

a. Since acetic acid is a weak acid, the major species in this solution are HC2H3O2 and
H2O. Both species are weak acids, but acetic acid is a much stronger acid than water.
Thus the dominant equilibrium will be
HC2H3O2 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C2H3O2 1aq2
and the equilibrium expression is
Ka  1.8  105 

3H 4 3C2H3O2 4
3HC2H3O2 4

The initial concentrations, deﬁnition of x, and equilibrium concentrations are:
HC2H3O2 (aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

1.00
x
1.00  x

∆

H (aq)
0
x
x



C2H3O2  (aq)
0
x
x

642

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
Inserting the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression and making
the usual approximation that x is small compared with [HA]0 give
Ka  1.8  105 

3H 4 3C2H3O2 4
1x21x2
x2


3HC2H3O2 4
1.00  x
1.00

Thus
x2  1.8  105 and

x  4.2  103

The approximation 1.00  x  1.00 is valid by the 5% rule (check this yourself), so
3H 4  x  4.2  103 M

The percent dissociation is

3H 4
4.2  103
 100 
 100%  0.42%
3HC2H3O2 4 0
1.00

An acetic acid solution, which is a weak
electrolyte, contains only a few ions and
does not conduct as much current as a
strong electrolyte. The bulb is only
dimly lit.

b. This is a similar problem, except that in this case [HC2H3O2 ]  0.100 M. Analysis of
the problem leads to the expression
Ka  1.8  105 

x  3H 4  1.3  103 M

Thus
and

3H 4 3C2H3O2 4
1x21x2
x2


3HC2H3O2 4
0.100  x
0.100

Percent dissociation 

1.3  103
 100%  1.3%
0.10
See Exercises 14.63 and 14.64.

The more dilute the weak acid solution,
the greater is the percent dissociation.

The results in Sample Exercise 14.10 show two important facts. The concentration of
H ion at equilibrium is smaller in the 0.10 M acetic acid solution than in the 1.0 M acetic
acid solution, as we would expect. However, the percent dissociation is signiﬁcantly greater
in the 0.10 M solution than in the 1.0 M solution. This is a general result. For solutions
of any weak acid HA, [H] decreases as [HA]0 decreases, but the percent dissociation
increases as [HA]0 decreases. This phenomenon can be explained as follows.
Consider the weak acid HA with the initial concentration [HA]0, where at equilibrium
3HA4  3HA4 0  x  3HA4 0
3H 4  3A 4  x
Ka 

Thus

3H 4 3A 4
1x21x2

3HA4
3HA4 0

Now suppose enough water is added suddenly to dilute the solution by a factor of 10. The
new concentrations before any adjustment occurs are
3A 4 new  3H  4 new 
3HA4 new 

3HA4 0
10

x
10

and Q, the reaction quotient, is
x
x
ba b
11x21x2
10 10
1

 Ka
Q
3HA4 0
103HA4 0
10
10
a

Since Q is less than Ka, the system must adjust to the right to reach the new equilibrium
position. Thus the percent dissociation increases when the acid is diluted. This behavior

14.5 Calculating the pH of Weak Acid Solutions

643

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Household Chemistry
ommon household bleach is an aqueous solution containing approximately 5% sodium hypochlorite, a potent
oxidizing agent that can react with and decolorize chemicals that cause stains. Bleaching solutions are manufactured
by dissolving chlorine gas in a sodium hydroxide solution
to give the reaction

C

Cl2 1g2  2OH 1aq2 ∆ OCl 1aq2  Cl 1aq2  H2O1l2
As long as the pH of this solution is maintained above 8,
the OCl ion is the predominant chlorine-containing species.
However, if the solution is made acidic (the [OH] lowered),
elemental chlorine (Cl2) is favored, and since Cl2 is much
less soluble in water than is sodium hypochlorite, Cl2 gas is
suddenly evolved from the solution. This is why labels on
bottles of bleach carry warnings about mixing the bleach
with other cleaning solutions. For example, toilet bowl
cleaners usually contain acids such as H3PO4 or HSO4 and
have pH values around 2. Mixing toilet bowl cleaner with
bleach can lead to a very dangerous evolution of chlorine
gas.
In addition, if bleach is mixed with a cleaning agent
containing ammonia, the chlorine and ammonia can react
to produce chloramines, such as NH2Cl, NHCl2, and NCl3.
These compounds produce acrid fumes that can cause respiratory distress.

The label on this bleach bottle warns of the hazards of mixing
cleaning solutions.

is summarized in Fig. 14.10. In Sample Exercise 14.11 we see how the percent dissociation can be used to calculate the Ka value for a weak acid.
Sample Exercise 14.11

More concentrated

More dilute

Acid concentration

Percent dissociation

H+ concentration

FIGURE 14.10
The effect of dilution on the percent
dissociation and [H] of a weak acid
solution.

Calculating Ka from Percent Dissociation
Lactic acid (HC3H5O3) is a waste product that accumulates in muscle tissue during exertion, leading to pain and a feeling of fatigue. In a 0.100 M aqueous solution, lactic acid
is 3.7% dissociated. Calculate the value of Ka for this acid.
Solution
From the small value for the percent dissociation, it is clear that HC3H5O3 is a weak acid.
Thus the major species in the solution are the undissociated acid and water:
HC3H5O3

and H2O

However, even though HC3H5O3 is a weak acid, it is a much stronger acid than water and
will be the dominant source of H in the solution. The dissociation reaction is
HC3H5O3 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C3H5O3 1aq2
and the equilibrium expression is
Ka 

3H 4 3C3H5O3 4
3HC3H5O3 4

644

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

Major Species

HC3H5O3

The initial and equilibrium concentrations are as follows:

Initial Concentration (mol/L)
[HC3H5O3 ] 0  0.10
[C3H5O3  ] 0  0
[H  ] 0  0

H 2O

Equilibrium Concentration (mol/L)
x mol/L
¬¬¬¡
HC3H5O3
dissociates

[HC3H5O3 ]  0.10  x
[C3H5O3  ]  x
[H  ]  x

The change needed to reach equilibrium can be obtained from the percent dissociation
and Equation (14.5). For this acid,
Percent dissociation  3.7% 
x

and

x
x
 100% 
 100%
3HC3H5O3 4 0
0.10

3.7
10.102  3.7  103 mol L
100

Now we can calculate the equilibrium concentrations:
3HC3H5O3 4  0.10  x  0.10 M
1to the correct number of significant figures2
3C3H5O3 4  3H 4  x  3.7  103 M
These concentrations can now be used to calculate the value of Ka for lactic acid:
Ka 

3H 4 3 C3H5O3 4
13.7  103 213.7  103 2

 1.4  104
3HC3H5O3 4
0.10

See Exercises 14.65 and 14.66.

Strenuous exercise causes a buildup of
lactic acid in muscle tissues.

In a basic solution at 25C, pH > 7.

14.6

Bases

According to the Arrhenius concept, a base is a substance that produces OH ions in aqueous solution. According to the Brønsted–Lowry model, a base is a proton acceptor. The
bases sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and potassium hydroxide (KOH) fulﬁll both criteria.
They contain OH ions in the solid lattice and, behaving as strong electrolytes, dissociate
completely when dissolved in aqueous solution:
NaOH1s2 ¡ Na 1aq2  OH 1aq2

Visualization: Limewater and
Carbon Dioxide

leaving virtually no undissociated NaOH. Thus a 1.0 M NaOH solution really contains
1.0 M Na and 1.0 M OH. Because of their complete dissociation, NaOH and KOH are
called strong bases in the same sense as we deﬁned strong acids.
All the hydroxides of the Group 1A elements (LiOH, NaOH, KOH, RbOH, and CsOH)
are strong bases, but only NaOH and KOH are common laboratory reagents, because the
lithium, rubidium, and cesium compounds are expensive. The alkaline earth (Group 2A)
hydroxides—Ca(OH)2, Ba(OH)2, and Sr(OH)2—are also strong bases. For these compounds, two moles of hydroxide ion are produced for every mole of metal hydroxide dissolved in aqueous solution.
The alkaline earth hydroxides are not very soluble and are used only when the solubility factor is not important. In fact, the low solubility of these bases can sometimes
be an advantage. For example, many antacids are suspensions of metal hydroxides,
such as aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide. The low solubility of these
compounds prevents a large hydroxide ion concentration that would harm the tissues
of the mouth, esophagus, and stomach. Yet these suspensions furnish plenty of

14.6 Bases

645

hydroxide ion to react with the stomach acid, since the salts dissolve as this reaction
proceeds.
Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2, often called slaked lime, is widely used in industry because it is inexpensive and plentiful. For example, slaked lime is used in scrubbing stack
gases to remove sulfur dioxide from the exhaust of power plants and factories. In the
scrubbing process a suspension of slaked lime is sprayed into the stack gases to react with
sulfur dioxide gas according to the following steps:
SO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ∆ H2SO3 1aq2
Ca1OH2 2 1aq2  H2SO3 1aq2 ∆ CaSO3 1s2  2H2O1l2

Slaked lime is also widely used in water treatment plants for softening hard water,
which involves the removal of ions, such as Ca2 and Mg2, that hamper the action of
detergents. The softening method most often employed in water treatment plants is the
lime–soda process, in which lime (CaO) and soda ash (Na2CO3) are added to the water.
As we will see in more detail later in this chapter, the CO32 ion reacts with water
to produce the HCO3 ion. When the lime is added to the water, it forms slaked lime,
that is,
CaO1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ Ca1OH2 2 1aq2
An antacid containing aluminum and
magnesium hydroxides.

which then reacts with the HCO3 ion from the added soda ash and the Ca2 ion in the
hard water to produce calcium carbonate:
Ca1OH2 2 1aq2  Ca2 1aq2  2HCO3 1aq2 ¡ 2CaCO3 1s2  2H2O1l2

Calcium carbonate is also used in scrubbing, as discussed in Section 5.10.

p

From hard water

Thus, for every mole of Ca(OH)2 consumed, 1 mole of Ca2 is removed from the hard
water, thereby softening it. Some hard water naturally contains bicarbonate ions. In this
case, no soda ash is needed—simply adding the lime produces the softening.
Calculating the pH of a strong base solution is relatively simple, as illustrated in Sample Exercise 14.12.

Sample Exercise 14.12

The pH of Strong Bases
Calculate the pH of a 5.0  102 M NaOH solution.

Major Species
Na

+

Solution
The major species in this solution are
Na,

OH,

and H2O

⎧⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎩

OH–

From NaOH
H 2O

Although autoionization of water also produces OH ions, the pH will be dominated by
the OH ions from the dissolved NaOH. Thus, in the solution,
3OH 4  5.0  102 M
and the concentration of H can be calculated from Kw:
Kw
1.0  1014

 2.0  1013 M
3OH 4
5.0  102
pH  12.70

3 H 4 

Note that this is a basic solution for which
3OH 4 7 3H 4

and pH 7 7

646

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
The added OH from the salt has shifted the water autoionization equilibrium
H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2
to the left, signiﬁcantly lowering [H] compared with that in pure water.
See Exercises 14.77 through 14.80.

A base does not have to contain
hydroxide ion.

Many types of proton acceptors (bases) do not contain the hydroxide ion. However,
when dissolved in water, these substances increase the concentration of hydroxide ion because of their reaction with water. For example, ammonia reacts with water as follows:
NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2
The ammonia molecule accepts a proton and thus functions as a base. Water is the acid
in this reaction. Note that even though the base ammonia contains no hydroxide ion, it
still increases the concentration of hydroxide ion to yield a basic solution.
Bases such as ammonia typically have at least one unshared pair of electrons that is
capable of forming a bond with a proton. The reaction of an ammonia molecule with a
water molecule can be represented as follows:
H

H
H

N

H

O

H
H

H

N

H O

H

H

There are many bases like ammonia that produce hydroxide ion by reaction with water.
In most of these bases, the lone pair is located on a nitrogen atom. Some examples are
N
N
H3C

H

N
H

Methylamine

H3C

H

N
CH3

Dimethylamine

H3C

CH3
CH3

Trimethylamine

N
H

H

C2H5

Ethylamine

Pyridine

Note that the ﬁrst four bases can be thought of as substituted ammonia molecules with
hydrogen atoms replaced by methyl (CH3) or ethyl (C2H5) groups. The pyridine molecule
is like benzene

except that a nitrogen atom replaces one of the carbon atoms in the ring. The general
reaction between a base B and water is given by
B1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ BH  1aq2  OH  1aq2
Base

Acid

Conjugate
acid

(14.6)

Conjugate
base

The equilibrium constant for this general reaction is
Appendix 5.3 contains a table of Kb
values.

Kb 

3BH  4 3 OH 4
3B4

where Kb always refers to the reaction of a base with water to form the conjugate acid
and the hydroxide ion.
Bases of the type represented by B in Equation (14.6) compete with OH, a very
strong base, for the H ion. Thus their Kb values tend to be small (for example, for ammonia, Kb  1.8  105), and they are called weak bases. The values of Kb for some
common weak bases are listed in Table 14.3.

647

14.6 Bases

TABLE 14.3

Visualization: Brønsted–Lowry
Reaction

Sample Exercise 14.13

Values of Kb for Some Common Weak Bases

Name

Formula

Conjugate
Acid

Kb

Ammonia
Methylamine
Ethylamine
Aniline
Pyridine

NH3
CH3NH2
C2H5NH2
C6H5NH2
C5H5N

NH4
CH3NH3
C2H5NH3
C6H5NH3
C5H5NH

1.8  105
4.38  104
5.6  104
3.8  1010
1.7  109

Typically, pH calculations for solutions of weak bases are very similar to those for
weak acids, as illustrated by Sample Exercises 14.13 and 14.14.

The pH of Weak Bases I
Calculate the pH for a 15.0 M solution of NH3 (Kb  1.8  105 ).
Solution
Since ammonia is a weak base, as can be seen from its small Kb value, most of the dissolved NH3 will remain as NH3. Thus the major species in solution are
NH3

Major Species

and H2O



NH3
H 2O

Both these substances can produce OH according to the reactions
NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2
H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2

Kb  1.8  105
Kw  1.0  1014

However, the contribution from water can be neglected, since Kb  Kw. The equilibrium
for NH3 will dominate, and the equilibrium expression to be used is
Kb  1.8  105 

3NH4 4 3OH 4
3NH3 4

The appropriate concentrations are

Refer to the steps for solving weak acid
equilibrium problems. Use the same
systematic approach for weak base
equilibrium problems.

Initial Concentration (mol/L)

Equilibrium Concentration (mol/L)

[NH3 ] 0  15.0
[NH4  ] 0  0
[OH ] 0  0

x mol/L
NH3 reacts with
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¡
H2O to reach
equilibrium

[NH3 ]  15.0  x
[NH4  ]  x
[OH  ]  x

In terms of an ICE table, these concentrations are:

NH3 (aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

15.0
x
15.0  x



H2O(l)
—
—
—

∆

NH4  (aq)
0
x
x



OH (aq)
0
x
x

648

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Amines
e have seen that many bases have nitrogen atoms with
one lone pair and can be viewed as substituted ammonia molecules, with the general formula RxNH13x2. Compounds of this type are called amines. Amines are widely
distributed in animals and plants, and complex amines often serve as messengers or regulators. For example, in the
human nervous system, there are two amine stimulants, norepinephrine and adrenaline.

W

Ephedrine, widely used as a decongestant, was a known
drug in China over 2000 years ago. Indians in Mexico and
the Southwest have used the hallucinogen mescaline, extracted from the peyote cactus, for centuries.
O H H H
C N CH3

H C

CH3

OH
HO

CHCH2NH2

Ephedrine

HO

CH2CH2NH2

Norepinephrine
OH
HO

CH3

CHCH2NHCH3

O

O
O

CH3

CH3
Mescaline

HO
Adrenaline

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression and making
the usual approximation gives
Kb  1.8  105 

3NH4 4 3OH 4
1x21x2
x2


3NH3 4
15.0  x
15.0

x  1.6  102

Thus

The 5% rule validates the approximation (check it yourself), so
3OH 4  1.6  102 M
Since we know that Kw must be satisﬁed for this solution, we can calculate [H] as follows:
3H 4 
Therefore,

Kw
1.0  1014
 6.3  1013 M
 
3OH 4
1.6  102

pH  log16.3  1013 2  12.20

See Exercises 14.83 and 14.84.
Sample Exercise 14.13 illustrates how a typical weak base equilibrium problem should
be solved. Note two additional important points:
A table of Kb values for bases is also
given in Appendix 5.3.

1. We calculated [H] from Kw and then calculated the pH, but another method is available.
The pOH could have been calculated from [OH ] and then used in Equation (14.3):
pKw  14.00  pH  pOH
pH  14.00  pOH

14.6 Bases

649

Many other drugs, such as codeine and quinine, are
amines, but they are usually not used in their pure amine
forms. Instead, they are treated with an acid to become acid
salts. An example of an acid salt is ammonium chloride, obtained by the reaction
NH3  HCl ¡ NH4Cl
Amines also can be protonated in this way. The resulting
acid salt, written as AHCl (where A represents the amine),
contains AH and Cl. In general, the acid salts are more
stable and more soluble in water than the parent amines. For
instance, the parent amine of the well-known local anesthetic
novocaine is insoluble in water, whereas the acid salt is much
more soluble.
O
C

O

H H H CH CH
2
3
C C N

H H Cl CH2CH3

Peyote cactus growing on a rock.

Novocaine hydrochloride
N
H

H

2. In a 15.0 M NH3 solution, the equilibrium concentrations of NH4 and OH are each
1.6  102 M. Only a small percentage,
1.6  102
 100%  0.11%
15.0
of the ammonia reacts with water. Bottles containing 15.0 M NH3 solution are often labeled 15.0 M NH4OH, but as you can see from these results, 15.0 M NH3 is actually a
much more accurate description of the solution contents.

Sample Exercise 14.14

The pH of Weak Bases II
Calculate the pH of a 1.0 M solution of methylamine (Kb  4.38  104 ).
Solution

Major Species
CH3NH2
H 2O

Since methylamine (CH3NH2) is a weak base, the major species in solution are
CH3NH2

and H2O

Both are bases; however, water can be neglected as a source of OH, so the dominant
equilibrium is
CH3NH2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ CH3NH3 1aq2  OH 1aq2
and

Kb  4.38  104 

3CH3NH3 4 3OH 4
3CH3NH2 4

650

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
The ICE table is:
CH3NH2 (aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:



H2O(l)

1.0
x
1.0  x

∆

CH3NH3  (aq)

—
—
—



0
x
x

OH  (aq)
0
x
x

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations in the equilibrium expression and making the
usual approximation give
Kb  4.38  104 

3CH3NH3 4 3OH 4
1x21x2
x2


3CH3NH2 4
1.0  x
1.0
x  2.1  102

and

The approximation is valid by the 5% rule, so
3OH 4  x  2.1  102 M
pOH  1.68
pH  14.00  1.68  12.32
See Exercises 14.85 and 14.86.

14.7

Polyprotic Acids

Some important acids, such as sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and phosphoric acid (H3PO4), can
furnish more than one proton and are called polyprotic acids. A polyprotic acid always
dissociates in a stepwise manner, one proton at a time. For example, the diprotic (twoproton) acid carbonic acid (H2CO3), which is so important in maintaining a constant pH
in human blood, dissociates in the following steps:
H2CO3 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2
HCO3 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  CO32 1aq2

3H 4 3 HCO3 4
 4.3  107
3H2CO3 4
3H 4 3 CO32 4
K a2 
 5.6  1011
3HCO3 4
K a1 

The successive Ka values for the dissociation equilibria are designated Ka1 and Ka2. Note
that the conjugate base HCO3 of the ﬁrst dissociation equilibrium becomes the acid in
the second step.
Carbonic acid is formed when carbon dioxide gas is dissolved in water. In fact, the
ﬁrst dissociation step for carbonic acid is best represented by the reaction
CO2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2
since relatively little H2CO3 actually exists in solution. However, it is convenient to consider CO2 in water as H2CO3 so that we can treat such solutions using the familiar
dissociation reactions for weak acids.
Phosphoric acid is a triprotic acid (three protons) that dissociates in the following steps:
H3PO4 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  H2PO4 1aq2
H2PO4 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  HPO42 1aq2
HPO42 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  PO43 1aq2

3H 4 3H2PO4 4
 7.5  103
3H3PO4 4
3H 4 3HPO42 4
Ka2 
 6.2  108
3H2PO4 4
3H 4 3PO43 4
Ka3 
 4.8  1013
3HPO42 4
Ka1 

651

14.7 Polyprotic Acids

TABLE 14.4

Stepwise Dissociation Constants for Several Common Polyprotic Acids

Name

Formula

Phosphoric acid
Arsenic acid
Carbonic acid
Sulfuric acid
Sulfurous acid
Hydrosulfuric acid*
Oxalic acid
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)

H3PO4
H3AsO4
H2CO3
H2SO4
H2SO3
H2S
H2C2O4
H2C6H6O6

K a1

Ka2

K a3

7.5  103
5  103
4.3  107
Large
1.5  102
1.0  107
6.5  102
7.9  105

6.2  108
8  108
5.6  1011
1.2  102
1.0  107
1019
6.1  105
1.6  1012

4.8  1013
6  1010

*The Ka2 value for H2S is very uncertain. Because it is so small, the Ka2 value is very difﬁcult to measure accurately.

For a typical weak polyprotic acid,
Ka1 7 Ka2 7 Ka3
A table of Ka values for polyprotic acids is
also given in Appendix 5.2.

That is, the acid involved in each step of the dissociation is successively weaker, as shown
by the stepwise dissociation constants given in Table 14.4. These values indicate that the
loss of a second or third proton occurs less readily than loss of the ﬁrst proton. This is
not surprising; as the negative charge on the acid increases, it becomes more difﬁcult to
remove the positively charged proton.
Although we might expect the pH calculations for solutions of polyprotic acids to be
complicated, the most common cases are surprisingly straightforward. To illustrate, we
will consider a typical case, phosphoric acid, and a unique case, sulfuric acid.

Phosphoric Acid
Phosphoric acid is typical of most polyprotic acids in that the successive Ka values are
very different. For example, the ratios of successive Ka values (from Table 14.4) are
K a1
K a2
K a2
K a3



7.5  103
 1.2  105
6.2  108



6.2  108
 1.3  105
4.8  1013

Thus the relative acid strengths are
H3PO4  H2PO4   HPO42
For a typical polyprotic acid in water, only
the ﬁrst dissociation step is important in
determining the pH.

Sample Exercise 14.15
Major Species
H3PO4

This means that in a solution prepared by dissolving H3PO4 in water, only the ﬁrst dissociation step makes an important contribution to [H]. This greatly simpliﬁes the pH calculations for phosphoric acid solutions, as is illustrated in Sample Exercise 14.15.

The pH of a Polyprotic Acid
Calculate the pH of a 5.0 M H3PO4 solution and the equilibrium concentrations of the
species H3PO4, H2PO4, HPO42, and PO43.
Solution
The major species in solution are

H 2O

H3PO4

and H2O

652

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
None of the dissociation products of H3PO4 is written, since the Ka values are all so small
that they will be minor species. The dominant equilibrium is the dissociation of H3PO4:
H3PO4 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  H2PO4 1aq2
Ka1  7.5  103 

where

3H 4 3H2PO4 4
3H3PO4 4

The ICE table is:

H3PO4 (aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

∆

H  (aq)

5.0
x
5.0  x



H2PO4  (aq)

0
x
x

0
x
x

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the expression for Ka1 and making the
usual approximation give
Ka1  7.5  103 

3H 4 3H2PO4 4
1x21x2
x2


3H3PO4 4
5.0  x
5.0

x  1.9  101

Thus

Since 1.9  101 is less than 5% of 5.0, the approximation is acceptable, and
3H 4  x  0.19 M
pH  0.72

So far we have determined that
3H 4  3H2PO4 4  0.19 M

3H3PO4 4  5.0  x  4.8 M

and
2

The concentration of HPO4

can be obtained by using the expression for Ka2:

Ka2  6.2  108 

3H 4 3HPO42 4
3H2PO4 4

3H 4  3H2PO4 4  0.19 M

where

3HPO42 4  Ka2  6.2  108 M

Thus

To calculate [PO43 ], we use the expression for Ka3 and the values of [H] and
[HPO42 ] calculated previously:
K a3 

3H 4 3PO43 4

 4.8  1013 

0.193PO43 4

3HPO42 4
16.2  108 2
14.8  1013 216.2  108 2
3PO43 4 
 1.6  1019 M
0.19
These results show that the second and third dissociation steps do not make an important contribution to [H]. This is apparent from the fact that [HPO42 ] is 6.2  10–8
M, which means that only 6.2  108 mol L H2PO4 has dissociated. The value of
[PO43 ] shows that the dissociation of HPO42 is even smaller. We must, however, use
the second and third dissociation steps to calculate [HPO42 ] and [PO43 ] , since these
steps are the only sources of these ions.
See Exercises 14.95 and 14.96.

653

14.7 Polyprotic Acids

Sulfuric Acid
Sulfuric acid is unique among the common acids in that it is a strong acid in its ﬁrst dissociation step and a weak acid in its second step:
H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ H 1aq2  HSO4 1aq2
HSO4 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  SO42 1aq2

Ka1 is very large
Ka2  1.2  102

Sample Exercise 14.16 illustrates how to calculate the pH for sulfuric acid solutions.
Sample Exercise 14.16

The pH of Sulfuric Acid
Calculate the pH of a 1.0 M H2SO4 solution.

Major Species

Solution

H+
HSO4

The major species in the solution are
H, HSO4,

–

H 2O

and H2O

where the ﬁrst two ions are produced by the complete ﬁrst dissociation step of H2SO4.
The concentration of H in this solution will be at least 1.0 M, since this amount is produced by the ﬁrst dissociation step of H2SO4. We must now answer this question: Does
the HSO4 ion dissociate enough to produce a signiﬁcant contribution to the concentration of H? This question can be answered by calculating the equilibrium concentrations
for the dissociation reactions of HSO4:
HSO4 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  SO42 1aq2
Ka2  1.2  102 

where

3H 4 3 SO42 4
3HSO4 4

The ICE table is:
HSO4 (aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

H (aq)

∆

1.0
x
1.0  x



1.0
x
1.0  x

SO42 (aq)
0
x
x

Note that [H]0 is not equal to zero, as it usually is for a weak acid, because the ﬁrst dissociation step has already occurred. Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the
expression for Ka2 and making the usual approximation give
Ka2  1.2  102 
Thus

3H 4 3SO42 4
11.0  x21x2
11.021x2



3HSO4 4
1.0  x
11.02
x  1.2  102

Since 1.2  102 is 1.2% of 1.0, the approximation is valid according to the 5% rule.
Note that x is not equal to [H] in this case. Instead,
A bottle of sulfuric acid.

3H 4  1.0 M  x  1.0 M  11.2  102 2 M
 1.0 M 1to the correct number of significant figures2
Thus the dissociation of HSO4 does not make a signiﬁcant contribution to the concentration of H, and
3H 4  1.0 M

and pH  0.00
See Exercise 14.97.

654

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

Only in dilute H2SO4 solutions does the
second dissociation step contribute
signiﬁcantly to [H].

Sample Exercise 14.17

Sample Exercise 14.16 illustrates the most common case for sulfuric acid in which
only the ﬁrst dissociation makes an important contribution to the concentration of H. In
solutions more dilute than 1.0 M (for example, 0.10 M H2SO4), the dissociation of HSO4
is important, and solving the problem requires use of the quadratic formula, as shown in
Sample Exercise 14.17.

The pH of Sulfuric Acid
Calculate the pH of a 1.00  102 M H2SO4 solution.

Major Species
H+

Solution
The major species in solution are
H,

HSO4–
H 2O

HSO4,

and

H2O

Proceeding as in Sample Exercise 14.16, we consider the dissociation of HSO4, which
leads to the following ICE table:
HSO4 (aq)
Initial:

Change:
Equilibrium:

H (aq)

∆

0.0100



0.0100
From dissociation
of H2SO4

x
0.0100  x

x
0.0100  x

SO42(aq)
0
x
x

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the expression for Ka2 gives
1.2  102  Ka2 

3H 4 3SO42 4
10.0100  x21x2


3HSO4 4
10.0100  x2

If we make the usual approximation, then 0.0100  x  0.0100 and 0.0100  x  0.0100,
and we have
1.2  102 

10.0100  x21x2
10.01002x

10.0100  x2
10.01002

The calculated value of x is
x  1.2  102  0.012
This value is larger than 0.010, clearly a ridiculous result. Thus we cannot make the usual
approximation and must instead solve the quadratic equation. The expression
1.2  102 
leads to

10.0100  x21x2
10.0100  x2

11.2  102 210.0100  x2  10.0100  x21x2
11.2  104 2  11.2  102 2x  11.0  102 2x  x2
x2  12.2  102 2x  11.2  104 2  0

This equation can be solved using the quadratic formula
x

b  2b2  4ac
2a

where a  1, b  2.2  102, and c  1.2  104. Use of the quadratic formula gives
one negative root (which cannot be correct) and one positive root,
x  4.5  103

14.8 Acid–Base Properties of Salts
Thus

655

3H 4  0.0100  x  0.0100  0.0045  0.0145
pH  1.84

and

Note that in this case the second dissociation step produces about half as many H ions
as the initial step does.
This problem also can be solved by successive approximations, a method illustrated
in Appendix 1.4.
See Exercise 14.98.

Characteristics of Weak Polyprotic Acids
1. Typically, successive Ka values are so much smaller than the ﬁrst value that only the
ﬁrst dissociation step makes a signiﬁcant contribution to the equilibrium concentration of H. This means that the calculation of the pH for a solution of a typical weak
polyprotic acid is identical to that for a solution of a weak monoprotic acid.
2. Sulfuric acid is unique in being a strong acid in its ﬁrst dissociation step and a weak
acid in its second step. For relatively concentrated solutions of sulfuric acid (1.0 M
or higher), the large concentration of H from the ﬁrst dissociation step represses
the second step, which can be neglected as a contributor of H ions. For dilute
solutions of sulfuric acid, the second step does make a signiﬁcant contribution, and
the quadratic equation must be used to obtain the total H concentration.

14.8

Acid–Base Properties of Salts

Salt is simply another name for ionic compound. When a salt dissolves in water, we assume that it breaks up into its ions, which move about independently, at least in dilute solutions. Under certain conditions, these ions can behave as acids or bases. In this section
we explore such reactions.

Salts That Produce Neutral Solutions

The salt of a strong acid and a strong
base gives a neutral solution.

Major Species
Na+

C2H3O2–
H 2O

Recall that the conjugate base of a strong acid has virtually no afﬁnity for protons in water. This is why strong acids completely dissociate in aqueous solution. Thus, when anions such as Cl and NO3 are placed in water, they do not combine with H and have
no effect on the pH. Cations such as K and Na from strong bases have no afﬁnity for
H, nor can they produce H, so they too have no effect on the pH of an aqueous solution. Salts that consist of the cations of strong bases and the anions of strong acids have
no effect on [H] when dissolved in water. This means that aqueous solutions of salts such
as KCl, NaCl, NaNO3, and KNO3 are neutral (have a pH of 7).

Salts That Produce Basic Solutions
In an aqueous solution of sodium acetate (NaC2H3O2), the major species are
Na,

C2H3O2,

and H2O

What are the acid–base properties of each component? The Na ion has neither acid nor
base properties. The C2H3O2 ion is the conjugate base of acetic acid, a weak acid. This
means that C2H3O2 has a signiﬁcant afﬁnity for a proton and is a base. Finally, water is
a weakly amphoteric substance.

656

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
The pH of this solution will be determined by the C2H3O2 ion. Since C2H3O2 is a
base, it will react with the best proton donor available. In this case, water is the only source
of protons, and the reaction between the acetate ion and water is
C2H3O2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ HC2H3O2 1aq2  OH 1aq2

(14.7)

Note that this reaction, which yields a base solution, involves a base reacting with water
to produce hydroxide ion and a conjugate acid. We have deﬁned Kb as the equilibrium
constant for such a reaction. In this case,
Kb 

3HC2H3O2 4 3OH 4
3C2H3O2 4

The value of Ka for acetic acid is well known (1.8  105 ). But how can we obtain
the Kb value for the acetate ion? The answer lies in the relationships among Ka, Kb, and
Kw. Note that when the expression for Ka for acetic acid is multiplied by the expression
for Kb for the acetate ion, the result is Kw:
Ka  Kb 

3H 4 3 C2H3O2 4
3HC2H3O2 4 3 OH 4

 3H 4 3OH 4  Kw
3HC2H3O2 4
3C2H3O2 4

This is a very important result. For any weak acid and its conjugate base,
Ka  Kb  Kw
Thus, when either Ka or Kb is known, the other can be calculated. For the acetate ion,
Kb 

A basic solution is formed if the anion of
the salt is the conjugate base of a weak
acid.

Sample Exercise 14.18

Kw
1.0  1014

 5.6  1010
Ka 1for HC2H3O2 2
1.8  105

This is the Kb value for the reaction described by Equation (14.7). Note that it is obtained
from the Ka value of the parent weak acid, in this case acetic acid. The sodium acetate
solution is an example of an important general case. For any salt whose cation has neutral properties (such as Naor K) and whose anion is the conjugate base of a weak acid,
the aqueous solution will be basic. The Kb value for the anion can be obtained from the
relationship Kb  Kw Ka. Equilibrium calculations of this type are illustrated in Sample
Exercise 14.18.

Salts as Weak Bases
Calculate the pH of a 0.30 M NaF solution. The Ka value for HF is 7.2  104.
Solution

Major Species
Na+
F–

H2 O

The major species in solution are
Na, F,

and H2O



Since HF is a weak acid, the F ion must have a signiﬁcant afﬁnity for protons, and the
dominant reaction will be
F 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ HF1aq2  OH 1aq2
which yields the Kb expression
Kb 

3HF4 3 OH 4
3F 4

The value of Kb can be calculated from Kw and the Ka value for HF:
Kb 

Kw
1.0  1014

 1.4  1011
Ka 1for HF2
7.2  104

657

14.8 Acid–Base Properties of Salts
The corresponding ICE table is:
F  (aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

Thus



H2O(l)

0.30
x
0.30  x

∆

—
—
—

Kb  1.4  1011 



HF(aq)

OH  (aq)
0
x
x

0
x
x

3HF4 3OH 4
1x21x2
x2


3F 4
0.30  x
0.30

and
x  2.0  106
The approximation is valid by the 5% rule, so
3OH 4  x  2.0  106 M
pOH  5.69
pH  14.00  5.69  8.31
As expected, the solution is basic.
See Exercise 14.103.

Base Strength in Aqueous Solutions
To emphasize the concept of base strength, let us consider the basic properties of the
cyanide ion. One relevant reaction is the dissociation of hydrocyanic acid in water:
HCN1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H3O 1aq2  CN 1aq2

Ka  6.2  1010

Since HCN is such a weak acid, CN appears to be a strong base, showing a very high
afﬁnity for H compared to H2O, with which it is competing. However, we also need to
look at the reaction in which cyanide ion reacts with water:
CN 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ HCN1aq2  OH 1aq2
where

Kb 

Kw
1.0  1014

 1.6  105
Ka
6.2  1010

In this reaction CN appears to be a weak base; the Kb value is only 1.6  105. What
accounts for this apparent difference in base strength? The key idea is that in the reaction
of CN with H2O, CN is competing with OH for H, instead of competing with H2O,
as it does in the HCN dissociation reaction. These equilibria show the following relative
base strengths:
OH 7 CN 7 H2O
Similar arguments can be made for other “weak” bases, such as ammonia, the acetate
ion, the ﬂuoride ion, and so on.

Salts That Produce Acidic Solutions
Some salts produce acidic solutions when dissolved in water. For example, when solid NH4Cl
is dissolved in water, NH4 and Cl ions are present, with NH4 behaving as a weak acid:
NH4 1aq2 ∆ NH3 1aq2  H 1aq2

658

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
The Cl ion, having virtually no afﬁnity for H in water, does not affect the pH of the
solution.
In general, salts in which the anion is not a base and the cation is the conjugate acid
of a weak base produce acidic solutions.
Sample Exercise 14.19

Salts as Weak Acids I
Calculate the pH of a 0.10 M NH4Cl solution. The Kb value for NH3 is 1.8  105.
Solution
The major species in solution are
NH4,

Major Species

Cl,

and H2O

Note that both NH4 and H2O can produce H. The dissociation reaction for the NH4
ion is
NH4 1aq2 ∆ NH3 1aq2  H 1aq2

Cl–
NH4+
H 2O

Ka 

for which

3NH3 4 3 H 4
3NH4 4

Note that although the Kb value for NH3 is given, the reaction corresponding to Kb is not
appropriate here, since NH3 is not a major species in the solution. Instead, the given value
of Kb is used to calculate Ka for NH4 from the relationship
Ka  Kb  Kw
Thus

Ka 1for NH4 2 

Kw
1.0  1014

 5.6  1010
Kb 1for NH3 2
1.8  105

Although NH4 is a very weak acid, as indicated by its Ka value, it is stronger than H2O
and will dominate in the production of H. Thus we will focus on the dissociation reaction of NH4 to calculate the pH in this solution.
We solve the weak acid problem in the usual way:

NH4 (aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

∆

H (aq)



0
x
x

0.10
x
0.10  x

NH3 (aq)
0
x
x

Thus
3H 4 3 NH3 4
1x21x2
x2


3NH4 4
0.10  x
0.10
6
x  7.5  10

5.6  1010  Ka 

The approximation is valid by the 5% rule, so
3H 4  x  7.5  106 M

and

pH  5.13
See Exercise 14.104.

A second type of salt that produces an acidic solution is one that contains a highly
charged metal ion. For example, when solid aluminum chloride (AlCl3) is dissolved
in water, the resulting solution is signiﬁcantly acidic. Although the Al3 ion is not

659

14.8 Acid–Base Properties of Salts

itself a Brønsted–Lowry acid, the hydrated ion Al(H2O)63 formed in water is a weak
acid:
Al1H2O2 63 1aq2 ∆ Al1OH21H2O2 52 1aq2  H 1aq2

Section 14.9 contains a further discussion of the acidity of hydrated ions.

Sample Exercise 14.20

The high charge on the metal ion polarizes the O¬H bonds in the attached water molecules, making the hydrogens in these water molecules more acidic than those in free water
molecules. Typically, the higher the charge on the metal ion, the stronger the acidity of
the hydrated ion.

Salts as Weak Acids II
Calculate the pH of a 0.010 M AlCl3 solution. The Ka value for Al(H2O)63 is 1.4  105.
Solution
The major species in solution are

Major Species

Cl,

Al1H2O2 63,
3

Since the Al(H2O)6

Cl–

and

H2O

ion is a stronger acid than water, the dominant equilibrium is

Al1H2O2 63 1aq2 ∆ Al1OH21H2O2 52 1aq2  H 1aq2
1.4  105  Ka 

and

Al(H2O)63+

3Al1OH21H2O2 52 4 3H 4
3Al1H2O2 63 4

This is a typical weak acid problem, which we can solve with the usual procedure:
H2 O

Al1H2O2 63 1aq2
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

Al1OH21H2O2 52 1aq2

∆

0.010
x
0.010  x



0
x
x

H  1aq2
0
x
x

Thus
1.4  105  Ka 

3Al1OH21H2O2 52 4 3 H 4
3Al1H2O2 6 4
x  3.7  104
3



1x21x2
x2

0.010  x
0.010

Since the approximation is valid by the 5% rule,
3H 4  x  3.7  104 M and

pH  3.43
See Exercises 14.109 and 14.110.

TABLE 14.5 Qualitative
Prediction of pH for Solutions
of Salts for Which Both Cation
and Anion Have Acidic or Basic
Properties
Ka 7 Kb
Kb 7 Ka
Ka  Kb

pH 6 7 (acidic)
pH 7 7 (basic)
pH  7 (neutral)

So far we have considered salts in which only one of the ions has acidic or basic
properties. For many salts, such as ammonium acetate (NH4C2H3O2), both ions can affect
the pH of the aqueous solution. Because the equilibrium calculations for these cases can
be quite complicated, we will consider only the qualitative aspects of such problems. We
can predict whether the solution will be basic, acidic, or neutral by comparing the Ka value
for the acidic ion with the Kb value for the basic ion. If the Ka value for the acidic ion is
larger than the Kb value for the basic ion, the solution will be acidic. If the Kb value is
larger than the Ka value, the solution will be basic. Equal Ka and Kb values mean a neutral
solution. These facts are summarized in Table 14.5.

660

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

Sample Exercise 14.21

The Acid–Base Properties of Salts
Predict whether an aqueous solution of each of the following salts will be acidic, basic,
or neutral.
a. NH4C2H3O2

b. NH4CN

c. Al2(SO4)3

Solution
a. The ions in solution are NH4 and C2H3O2. As we mentioned previously, Ka for NH4
is 5.6  1010 and Kb for C2H3O2 is 5.6  1010. Thus Ka for NH4 is equal to Kb
for C2H3O2, and the solution will be neutral (pH  7).
b. The solution will contain NH4 and CN ions. The Ka value for NH4 is 5.6  1010
and
Kb 1for CN 2 

Kw
 1.6  105
Ka 1for HCN2

Since Kb for CN is much larger than Ka for NH4, CN is a much stronger base than
NH4 is an acid. This solution will be basic.
c. The solution will contain Al(H2O)63 and SO42 ions. The Ka value for Al(H2O)63 is
1.4  105, as given in Sample Exercise 14.20. We must calculate Kb for SO42. The
HSO4 ion is the conjugate acid of SO42, and its Ka value is Ka2 for sulfuric acid, or
1.2  102. Therefore,
Kb 1for SO42 2 

Kw
Ka2 1for sulfuric acid2
1.0  10 14

 8.3  1013
1.2  10 2

This solution will be acidic, since Ka for Al(H2O)63 is much greater than Kb for SO42.
See Exercises 14.111 and 14.112.

The acid–base properties of aqueous solutions of various salts are summarized in
Table 14.6.

TABLE 14.6

Acid–Base Properties of Various Types of Salts

Type of Salt

Examples

Comment

pH of Solution

Cation is from strong base; anion is
from strong acid

KCl, KNO3,
NaCl, NaNO3

Neither acts as an
acid or a base

Neutral

Cation is from strong base; anion is
from weak acid

NaC2H3O2,
KCN, NaF

Basic

Cation is conjugate acid of weak base;
anion is from strong acid

NH4Cl,
NH4NO3

Cation is conjugate acid of weak base;
anion is conjugate base of weak acid

NH4C2H3O2,
NH4CN

Anion acts as a base;
cation has no effect
on pH
Cation acts as acid;
anion has no effect
on pH
Cation acts as an acid;
anion acts as a base

Cation is highly charged metal ion;
anion is from strong acid

Al(NO3)3,
FeCl3

Hydrated cation acts as
an acid; anion has no
effect on pH

Acidic
Acidic if Ka  Kb,
basic if Kb  Ka,
neutral if Ka  Kb
Acidic

14.9 The Effect of Structure on Acid–Base Properties

14.9
Further aspects of acid strengths are
discussed in Section 20.7.

TABLE 14.7 Bond Strengths
and Acid Strengths for
Hydrogen Halides

H¬X Bond

Bond
Strength
(kJ/mol)

Acid
Strength
in Water

H¬F
H¬Cl
H¬Br
H¬I

565
427
363
295

Weak
Strong
Strong
Strong

661

The Effect of Structure on Acid–Base Properties

We have seen that when a substance is dissolved in water, it produces an acidic solution
if it can donate protons and produces a basic solution if it can accept protons. What structural properties of a molecule cause it to behave as an acid or as a base?
Any molecule containing a hydrogen atom is potentially an acid. However, many such
molecules show no acidic properties. For example, molecules containing COH bonds,
such as chloroform (CHCl3) and nitromethane (CH3NO2), do not produce acidic aqueous
solutions because a COH bond is both strong and nonpolar and thus there is no tendency
to donate protons. On the other hand, although the HOCl bond in gaseous hydrogen
chloride is slightly stronger than a COH bond, it is much more polar, and this molecule
readily dissociates when dissolved in water.
Thus there are two main factors that determine whether a molecule containing an
XOH bond will behave as a Brønsted–Lowry acid: the strength of the bond and the polarity
of the bond.
To explore these factors let’s consider the relative acid strengths of the hydrogen
halides. The bond polarities vary as shown
H¬F 7 H¬Cl 7 H¬Br 7 H¬I
h

h

Most polar

Least polar

because electronegativity decreases going down the group. Based on the high polarity of
the HOF bond, we might expect hydrogen ﬂuoride to be a very strong acid. In fact, among
HX molecules, HF is the only weak acid (Ka  7.2  104 ) when dissolved in water.
The HOF bond is unusually strong, as shown in Table 14.7, and thus is difﬁcult to break.
This contributes signiﬁcantly to the reluctance of the HF molecules to dissociate in water.
Another important class of acids are the oxyacids, which as we saw in Section 14.2
characteristically contain the grouping HOOOX. Several series of oxyacids are listed
with their Ka values in Table 14.8. Note from these data that for a given series the acid
strength increases with an increase in the number of oxygen atoms attached to the central atom. For example, in the series containing chlorine and a varying number of oxygen
atoms, HOCl is a weak acid, but the acid strength is successively greater as the number
of oxygen atoms increases. This happens because the very electronegative oxygen atoms
are able to draw electrons away from the chlorine atom and the OOH bond, as shown in
Fig. 14.11. The net effect is to both polarize and weaken the OOH bond; this effect becomes more important as the number of attached oxygen atoms increases. This means that
a proton is most readily produced by the molecule with the largest number of attached
oxygen atoms (HClO4).
This type of behavior is also observed for hydrated metal ions. Earlier in this chapter
we saw that highly charged metal ions such as Al3 produce acidic solutions. The acidity
of the water molecules attached to the metal ion is increased by the attraction of electrons
to the positive metal ion:
D
Al3OO
G

H
H

The greater the charge on the metal ion, the more acidic the hydrated ion becomes.
For acids containing the H—O—X grouping, the greater the ability of X to draw
electrons toward itself, the greater the acidity of the molecule. Since the electronegativity of X reﬂects its ability to attract the electrons involved in bonding, we might expect
acid strength to depend on the electronegativity of X. In fact, there is an excellent correlation between the electronegativity of X and the acid strength for oxyacids, as shown
in Table 14.9.

662

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
Cl

O

H

Electron density
O

Cl

O

TABLE 14.8
Ka Values
Oxyacid

Structure

Ka Value

HClO4

O
D
HOOO ClOO
G
O

Large (107 2

HClO3

O
D
HOOO Cl
G
O

1

HClO2

H—O—Cl—O

1.2  102

HClO

H—O—Cl

3.5  108

H2SO4

OOH
D
HOOO S OO
G
O

Large

H2SO3

OOH
D
HOOO S
G
O

1.5  102

HNO3

O
D
HOOON
G
O

Large

HNO2

H—O—N—O

4.0  104

H

Electron density
O
Cl

O

H

O
Electron density

O
O Cl
O

O

H

Electron density

FIGURE 14.11
The effect of the number of attached
oxygens on the OOH bond in a series
of chlorine oxyacids. As the number of
oxygen atoms attached to the chlorine
atom increases, they become more effective at withdrawing electron density from
the OOH bond, thereby weakening and
polarizing it. This increases the tendency
for the molecule to produce a proton,
and so its acid strength increases.

Several Series of Oxyacids and Their

TABLE 14.9 Comparison of Electronegativity of X and Ka Value for a
Series of Oxyacids
Acid

X

Electronegativity
of X

Ka for Acid

HOCl
HOBr
HOI
HOCH3

Cl
Br
I
CH3

3.0
2.8
2.5
2.3 (for carbon in CH3)

4  108
2  109
2  1011
1015

14.10
A compound containing the H¬O¬X
group will produce an acidic solution in
water if the O¬X bond is strong and
covalent. If the O¬X bond is ionic, the
compound will produce a basic solution
in water.

Acid–Base Properties of Oxides

We have just seen that molecules containing the grouping H—O—X can behave as acids
and that the acid strength depends on the electron-withdrawing ability of X. But substances with this grouping also can behave as bases if the hydroxide ion instead of a proton is produced. What determines which behavior will occur? The answer lies mainly in
the nature of the O—X bond. If X has a relatively high electronegativity, the O—X bond
will be covalent and strong. When the compound containing the H—O—X grouping is
dissolved in water, the O—X bond will remain intact. It will be the polar and relatively
weak H—O bond that will tend to break, releasing a proton. On the other hand, if X has

14.11 The Lewis Acid–Base Model

663

a very low electronegativity, the O—X bond will be ionic and subject to being broken in
polar water. Examples are the ionic substances NaOH and KOH that dissolve in water to
give the metal cation and the hydroxide ion.
We can use these principles to explain the acid–base behavior of oxides when they
are dissolved in water. For example, when a covalent oxide such as sulfur trioxide is dissolved in water, an acidic solution results because sulfuric acid is formed:
SO3 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2SO4 1aq2
The structure of H2SO4 is shown in the margin. In this case, the strong, covalent O—S
bonds remain intact and the H—O bonds break to produce protons. Other common covalent oxides that react with water to form acidic solutions are sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide, as shown by the following reactions:
SO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2SO3 1aq2
CO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2CO3 1aq2
2NO21g2  H2O1l2 ¡ HNO31aq2  HNO2 1aq2

Thus, when a covalent oxide dissolves in water, an acidic solution forms. These oxides
are called acidic oxides.
On the other hand, when an ionic oxide dissolves in water, a basic solution results,
as shown by the following reactions:
CaO1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ Ca1OH2 2 1aq2
K2O1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2KOH1aq2

These reactions can be explained by recognizing that the oxide ion has a high afﬁnity for
protons and reacts with water to produce hydroxide ions:
O2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2OH 1aq2
Thus the most ionic oxides, such as those of the Group 1A and 2A metals, produce
basic solutions when they are dissolved in water. As a result, these oxides are called
basic oxides.

14.11

The Lewis Acid–Base Model

We have seen that the ﬁrst successful conceptualization of acid–base behavior was
proposed by Arrhenius. This useful but limited model was replaced by the more general
Brønsted–Lowry model. An even more general model for acid–base behavior was suggested by G. N. Lewis in the early 1920s. A Lewis acid is an electron-pair acceptor, and
a Lewis base is an electron-pair donor. Another way of saying this is that a Lewis acid
has an empty atomic orbital that it can use to accept (share) an electron pair from a molecule that has a lone pair of electrons (Lewis base). The three models for acids and bases
are summarized in Table 14.10.

TABLE 14.10

Three Models for Acids and Bases

Model

Deﬁnition of Acid

Deﬁnition of Base

Arrhenius
Brønsted–Lowry
Lewis

H producer
H donor
Electron-pair acceptor

OH producer
H acceptor
Electron-pair donor

664

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
Note that Brønsted–Lowry acid–base reactions (proton donor–proton acceptor reactions) are encompassed by the Lewis model. For example, the reaction between a proton
and an ammonia molecule, that is,
H

H
H  N

H

H

N

H
H

H
Lewis
acid



Lewis
base

can be represented as a reaction between an electron-pair acceptor (H) and an electronpair donor (NH3). The same holds true for a reaction between a proton and a hydroxide ion:
H
H

H]

[ O

O
H

Lewis
acid

The Lewis model encompasses the
Brønsted–Lowry model, but the reverse
is not true.

Lewis
base

The real value of the Lewis model for acids and bases is that it covers many reactions
that do not involve Brønsted–Lowry acids. For example, consider the gas-phase reaction
between boron triﬂuoride and ammonia.

B

F  N

F

H

F

H
Lewis
acid

H

F

H

F

N

B

H
H

F

Lewis
base

Here the electron-deﬁcient BF3 molecule (there are only six electrons around the boron)
completes its octet by reacting with NH3, which has a lone pair of electrons. (see Fig. 14.12.)
In fact, as mentioned in Chapter 8, the electron deﬁciency of boron triﬂuoride makes it
very reactive toward any electron-pair donor. That is, it is a strong Lewis acid.
The hydration of a metal ion, such as Al3, also can be viewed as a Lewis acid–base
reaction:
H
Al3  6 O

Al
H

Lewis
acid

+
FIGURE 14.12
Reaction of BF3 with NH3.

Lewis
base

3

H
O
H

6

14.11 The Lewis Acid–Base Model

Al3+

665

Al3+

FIGURE 14.13
The Al(H2O) 63 ion.

Here the Al3 ion accepts one electron pair from each of six water molecules to form
Al(H2O) 63 (see Fig. 14.13).
In addition, the reaction between a covalent oxide and water to form a Brønsted–Lowry
acid can be deﬁned as a Lewis acid–base reaction. An example is the reaction between
sulfur trioxide and water:
H
O

O

H
 O

S
O

O

O

Lewis
acid

H

O

S

H

O

Lewis
base

Note that as the water molecule attaches to sulfur trioxide, a proton shift occurs to form
sulfuric acid.
Sample Exercise 14.22

Lewis Acids and Bases
For each reaction, identify the Lewis acid and base.
a. Ni2 (aq)  6NH3 (aq) ¡ Ni(NH3 ) 62 (aq)
b. H (aq)  H2O(aq) ∆ H3O (aq)
Solution
a. Each NH3 molecule donates an electron pair to the Ni2 ion:

Ni2  6

N

H

N

Ni

H
H

H
Lewis
acid

2

H

H

6

Lewis
base

The nickel(II) ion is the Lewis acid, and ammonia is the Lewis base.
b. The proton is the Lewis acid and the water molecule is the Lewis base:
H
H  O

H



O
H

Lewis
acid

H
H

Lewis
base

See Exercises 14.119 and 14.120.

666

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Self-Destructing Paper
he New York City Public Library has 88
miles of bookshelves, and on 36 miles of
these shelves the books are quietly disintegrating between their covers. In fact, an estimated
40% of the books in the major research collections in the United States will soon be too fragile to handle.
The problem results from the acidic paper widely used in printing books in the past
century. Ironically, books from the eighteenth,
seventeenth, sixteenth, and even ﬁfteenth century are in much better shape. Gutenberg
Bibles contain paper that is in remarkably
good condition. In those days, paper was made
by hand from linen or rags, but in the nineteenth century, the demand for cheap paper
skyrocketed. Paper manufacturers found that
paper could be made economically, by machine, using wood
pulp. To size the paper (that is, ﬁll in microscopic holes to
lower absorption of moisture and prevent seeping or spreading of inks), alum [Al2 (SO4 ) 3] was added in large amounts.

T

14.12

A book ravaged by the decomposition of acidic paper.

Because the hydrated aluminum ion [Al(H2O) 63 ] is an acid
(Ka  105 ), paper manufactured using alum is quite acidic.

Strategy for Solving Acid–Base Problems:
A Summary

In this chapter we have encountered many different situations involving aqueous solutions of acids and bases, and in the next chapter we will encounter still more. In solving
for the equilibrium concentrations in these aqueous solutions, it is tempting to create
a pigeonhole for each possible situation and to memorize the procedures necessary to
deal with that particular case. This approach is just not practical and usually leads to
frustration: Too many pigeonholes are required—there seems to be an inﬁnite number
of cases. But you can handle any case successfully by taking a systematic, patient, and
thoughtful approach. When analyzing an acid–base equilibrium problem, do not ask
yourself how a memorized solution can be used to solve the problem. Instead, ask this
question: What are the major species in the solution and what is their chemical
behavior?
The most important part of doing a complicated acid–base equilibrium problem is the
analysis you do at the beginning of a problem.
What major species are present?
Does a reaction occur that can be assumed to go to completion?
What equilibrium dominates the solution?
Let the problem guide you. Be patient.
The following steps outline a general strategy for solving problems involving acid–base
equilibria.

14.12 Strategy for Solving Acid–Base Problems: A Summary

Over time this acidity causes the paper ﬁbers to disintegrate;
the pages of books fall apart when they are used.
One could transfer the contents of the threatened books
to microﬁlm, but that would be a very slow and expensive
process. Can the books be chemically treated to neutralize the
acid and stop the deterioration? Yes. In fact, you know
enough chemistry at this point to design the treatment patented
in 1936 by Otto Schierholz. He dipped individual pages in
solutions of alkaline earth bicarbonate salts [Mg(HCO3)2,
Ca(HCO3)2, and so on]. The HCO3 ions present in these
solutions react with the H in the paper to give CO2 and H2O.
This treatment works well and is used today to preserve especially important works, but it is slow and labor-intensive.
It would be much more economical if large numbers of
books could be treated at one time without disturbing the
bindings. However, soaking entire books in an aqueous solution is out of the question. A logical question then is: Are
there gaseous bases that could be used to neutralize the acid?
Certainly; the organic amines (general formula, RNH2) are
bases, and those with low molar masses are gases under
normal conditions. Experiments in which books were treated
using ammonia, butylamine (CH3CH2CH2CH2NH2), and other
amines have shown that the method works, but only for a
short time. The amines do enter the paper and neutralize the
acid, but being volatile, they gradually evaporate, leaving
the paper in its original acidic condition.

667

A much more effective treatment involves diethylzinc
[(CH3CH2)2Zn], which boils at 117°C and 1 atm. Diethylzinc
(DEZ) reacts with oxygen or water to produce ZnO as
follows:
1CH3CH2 2 2Zn1g2  7O2 1g2 ¡
ZnO1s2  4CO2 1g2  5H2O1g2
1CH3CH2 2 2Zn1g2  H2O1g2 ¡ ZnO1s2  2CH3CH3 1g2
The solid zinc oxide produced in these reactions is deposited
among the paper ﬁbers, and being a basic oxide, it neutralizes the acid present as shown in the equation
ZnO  2H ¡ Zn2  H2O
One major problem is that DEZ ignites spontaneously on
contact with air. Therefore, this treatment must be carried out
in a chamber ﬁlled mainly with N2(g), where the amount of
O2 present can be rigorously controlled. The pressure in the
chamber must be maintained well below one atmosphere
both to lower the boiling point of DEZ and to remove excess moisture from the book’s pages. Several major DEZ
ﬁres have slowed its implementation as a book preservative.
However, the Library of Congress has designed a new DEZ
treatment plant that includes a chamber large enough for approximately 9000 books to be treated at one time.

Solving Acid–Base Problems

➥1
➥2
➥3
➥4
➥5

List the major species in solution.
Look for reactions that can be assumed to go to completion—for example, a
strong acid dissociating or H reacting with OH  .
For a reaction that can be assumed to go to completion:
a. Determine the concentration of the products.
b. Write down the major species in solution after the reaction.
Look at each major component of the solution and decide if it is an acid or a base.
Pick the equilibrium that will control the pH. Use known values of the dissociation
constants for the various species to help decide on the dominant equilibrium.
a. Write the equation for the reaction and the equilibrium expression.
b. Compute the initial concentrations (assuming the dominant equilibrium has
not yet occurred, that is, no acid dissociation, and so on).
c. Deﬁne x.
d. Compute the equilibrium concentrations in terms of x.
e. Substitute the concentrations into the equilibrium expression, and solve for x.
f. Check the validity of the approximation.
g. Calculate the pH and other concentrations as required.

Although these steps may seem somewhat cumbersome, especially for simpler problems, they will become increasingly helpful as the aqueous solutions become more complicated. If you develop the habit of approaching acid–base problems systematically,
the more complex cases will be much easier to manage.

668

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

Key Terms

For Review

Section 14.1
Arrhenius concept
Brønsted–Lowry model
hydronium ion
conjugate base
conjugate acid
conjugate acid–base pair
acid dissociation constant

Section 14.2
strong acid
weak acid
diprotic acid
oxyacids
organic acids
carboxyl group
monoprotic acids
amphoteric substance
autoionization
ion-product (dissociation) constant

Section 14.3
pH scale

Section 14.4

Models for acids and bases
䊉 Arrhenius model
• Acids produce H in solution
• Bases produce OH in solution
䊉 Brønsted–Lowry model
• An acid is a proton donor
• A base is a proton acceptor
• In this model an acid molecule reacts with a water molecule, which behaves as a base:
HA(aq)  H2O(l) ∆ H3O  (aq)  A (aq)
Acid

䊉

Ka 

percent dissociation

Section 14.8
salt

Section 14.10
acidic oxides
basic oxides

Section 14.11
Lewis acid
Lewis base

3H3O  4 3A 4
3HA4

which is often simpliﬁed as

Section 14.6

polyprotic acid
triprotic acid

Conjugate
base

Acid–base equilibrium
䊉 The equilibrium constant for an acid dissociating (ionizing) in water is called Ka
䊉 The Ka expression is

Section 14.5

Section 14.7

Conjugate
acid

to form a new acid (conjugate acid) and a new base (conjugate base).
Lewis model
• A Lewis acid is an electron-pair acceptor
• A Lewis base is an electron-pair donor

major species

strong bases
slaked lime
lime–soda process
weak bases
amine

Base

Ka 

3H  4 3 A 4
3HA4

• [H2O] is never included because it is assumed to be constant
Acid strength
䊉 A strong acid has a very large Ka value
• The acid completely dissociates (ionizes) in water
• The dissociation (ionization) equilibrium position lies all the way to the right
• Strong acids have very weak conjugate bases
• The common strong acids are nitric acid [HNO3 (aq)], hydrochloric acid
[HCl(aq)], sulfuric acid [H2SO(aq)] and perchloric acid [HClO4 (aq)]
䊉 A weak acid has a small Ka value
• The acid dissociates (ionizes) to only a slight extent
• The dissociation (ionization) equilibrium position lies far to the left
• Weak acids have relatively strong conjugate bases
• Percent dissociation of a weak acid
% dissociation 

amount dissociated 1mol/L2
 100%
initial concentration 1mol/L2

• The smaller the percent dissociation, the weaker the acid
• Dilution of a weak acid increases its percent dissociation
Autoionization of water
Water is an amphoteric substance: it behaves as both an acid and a base
䊉 Water reacts with itself in an acid–base reaction
䊉

H2O1l2  H2O1l2 ∆ H3O  1aq2  OH 1aq2

For Review

669

which leads to the equilibrium expression
Kw  3H3O  4 3 OH 4

䊉
䊉
䊉

or

3H 4 3OH 4  Kw

• Kw is the ion-product constant for water
• At 25°C in pure water [H  ]  [OH ]  1.0  107, so Kw  1.0  1014
Acidic solution: [H  ] 7 [OH ]
Basic solution: [OH ] 7 [H  ]
Neutral solution: [H  ]  [OH ]

The pH scale

䊉 pH  log [H ]

䊉 Since pH is a log scale, the pH changes by 1 for every 10-fold change in [H ]

䊉 The log scale is also used for [OH ] and for Ka values
pOH  log 3OH 4
pKa  logKa

Bases
Strong bases are hydroxide salts, such as NaOH and KOH

䊉 Weak bases react with water to produce OH
䊉

B1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ BH  1aq2  OH 1aq2
• The equilibrium constant for this reaction is called Kb where
Kb 

3BH  4 3 OH 4
3B4

• In water a base B is always competing with OH for a proton (H), so Kb
values tend to be very small, thus making B a weak base (compared to OH)
Polyprotic acids
䊉 A polyprotic acid has more than one acidic proton
䊉 Polyprotic acids dissociate one proton at a time
• Each step has a characteristic Ka value
• Typically for a weak polyprotic acid, Ka1 7 Ka2 7 Ka3
䊉 Sulfuric acid is unique
• It is a strong acid in the ﬁrst dissociation step (Ka1 is very large)
• It is a weak acid in the second step
Acid–base properties of salts
䊉 Can produce acidic, basic, or neutral solutions
䊉 Salts that contain:
• Cations of strong bases and anions of strong acids produce neutral solutions
• Cations of strong bases and anions of weak acids produce basic solutions
• Cations of weak bases and anions of strong acids produce acidic solutions
䊉 Acidic solutions are produced by salts containing a highly charged metal cation—
for example, Al3 and Fe3
Effect of structure on acid–base properties
䊉 Many substances that function as acids or bases contain the H¬O¬X grouping
• Molecules in which the O¬X bond is strong and covalent tend to behave as
acids
• As X becomes more electronegative, the acid becomes stronger
• When the O¬X bond is ionic, the substance behaves as a base, releasing OH
ions in water

670

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Deﬁne each of the following:
a. Arrhenius acid
b. Brønsted–Lowry acid
c. Lewis acid
Which of the deﬁnitions is most general? Write reactions to justify your answer.
2. Deﬁne or illustrate the meaning of the following terms:
a. Ka reaction
b. Ka equilibrium constant
c. Kb reaction
d. Kb equilibrium constant
e. conjugate acid–base pair
3. Deﬁne or illustrate the meaning of the following terms:
a. amphoteric
b. Kw reaction
c. Kw equilibrium constant
d. pH
e. pOH
f. pKw
Give the conditions for a neutral solution at 25°C, in terms of [H], pH, and the
relationship between [H] and [OH ]. Do the same for an acidic solution and
for a basic solution. As a solution becomes more acidic, what happens to pH,
pOH, [H], and [OH ]? As a solution becomes more basic, what happens to
pH, pOH, [H], and [OH ]?
4. How is acid strength related to the value of Ka? What is the difference between
strong acids versus weak acids (see Table 14.1)? As the strength of an acid increases, what happens to the strength of the conjugate base? How is base
strength related to the value of Kb? As the strength of a base increases, what
happens to the strength of the conjugate acid?
5. Two strategies are followed when solving for the pH of an acid in water. What
is the strategy for calculating the pH of a strong acid in water? What major assumptions are made when solving strong acid problems? The best way to recognize strong acids is to memorize them. List the six common strong acids (the
two not listed in the text are HBr and HI).
Most acids, by contrast, are weak acids. When solving for the pH of a weak
acid in water, you must have the Ka value. List two places in this text that provide Ka values for weak acids. You can utilize these tables to help you recognize
weak acids. What is the strategy for calculating the pH of a weak acid in water?
What assumptions are generally made? What is the 5% rule? If the 5% rule
fails, how do you calculate the pH of a weak acid in water?
6. Two strategies are also followed when solving for the pH of a base in water.
What is the strategy for calculating the pH of a strong base in water? List the
strong bases mentioned in the text that should be committed to memory. Why is
calculating the pH of Ca(OH)2 solutions a little more difﬁcult than calculating
the pH of NaOH solutions?
Most bases are weak bases. The presence of what element most commonly
results in basic properties for an organic compound? What is present on this element in compounds that allows it to accept a proton?
Table 14.3 and Appendix 5 of the text list Kb values for some weak bases.
What strategy is used to solve for the pH of a weak base in water? What assumptions are made when solving for the pH of weak base solutions? If the 5%
rule fails, how do you calculate the pH of a weak base in water?

For Review

671

7. Table 14.4 lists the stepwise Ka values for some polyprotic acids. What is the
difference between a monoprotic acid, a diprotic acid, and a triprotic acid? Most
polyprotic acids are weak acids; the major exception is H2SO4. To solve for the
pH of a solution of H2SO4, you must solve a strong acid problem as well as a
weak acid problem. Explain. Write out the reactions that refer to Ka1 and Ka2 for
H2SO4.
For H3PO4, Ka1  7.5  103, Ka2  6.2  108, and Ka3  4.8  1013.
Write out the reactions that refer to the Ka1, Ka2, and Ka3 equilibrium constants.
What are the three acids in a solution of H3PO4? Which acid is strongest? What
are the three conjugate bases in a solution of H3PO4? Which conjugate base is
strongest? Summarize the strategy for calculating the pH of a polyprotic acid
in water.
8. For conjugate acid–base pairs, how are Ka and Kb related? Consider the reaction
of acetic acid in water
CH3CO2H1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ CH3CO2 1aq2  H3O  1aq2
where Ka  1.8  105.
a. Which two bases are competing for the proton?
b. Which is the stronger base?
c. In light of your answer to part b, why do we classify the acetate ion
(CH3CO2 ) as a weak base? Use an appropriate reaction to justify your
answer.
In general, as base strength increases, conjugate acid strength decreases.
Explain why the conjugate acid of the weak base NH3 is a weak acid.
To summarize, the conjugate base of a weak acid is a weak base and the
conjugate acid of a weak base is a weak acid (weak gives you weak). Assuming
Ka for a monoprotic strong acid is 1  106, calculate Kb for the conjugate base
of this strong acid. Why do conjugate bases of strong acids have no basic
properties in water? List the conjugate bases of the six common strong acids.
To tie it all together, some instructors have students think of Li, K, Rb,
Cs, Ca2, Sr2, and Ba2 as the conjugate acids of the strong bases LiOH,
KOH, RbOH, CsOH, Ca(OH)2, Sr(OH)2, and Ba(OH)2. Although not technically correct, the conjugate acid strength of these cations is similar to the conjugate base strength of the strong acids. That is, these cations have no acidic
properties in water; similarly, the conjugate bases of strong acids have no
basic properties (strong gives you worthless). Fill in the blanks with the correct response. The conjugate base of a weak acid is a
base.
The conjugate acid of a weak base is a
acid. The conjugate
base of a strong acid is a
base. The conjugate acid of a
strong base is a
acid. (Hint: Weak gives you weak and strong
gives you worthless.)
9. What is a salt? List some anions that behave as weak bases in water. List
some anions that have no basic properties in water. List some cations that
behave as weak acids in water. List some cations that have no acidic properties in water. Using these lists, give some formulas for salts that have only
weak base properties in water. What strategy would you use to solve for the
pH of these basic salt solutions? Identify some salts that have only weak acid
properties in water. What strategy would you use to solve for the pH of these
acidic salt solutions? Identify some salts that have no acidic or basic properties in water (produce neutral solutions). When a salt contains both a weak
acid ion and a weak base ion, how do you predict whether the solution pH is
acidic, basic, or neutral?

672

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

10. For oxyacids, how does acid strength depend on
a. the strength of the bond to the acidic hydrogen atom?
b. the electronegativity of the element bonded to the oxygen atom that bears the
acidic hydrogen?
c. the number of oxygen atoms?
How does the strength of a conjugate base depend on these factors?
What type of solution forms when a nonmetal oxide dissolves in water?
Give an example of such an oxide. What type of solution forms when a metal
oxide dissolves in water? Give an example of such an oxide.

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. Consider two beakers of pure water at different temperatures.
How do their pH values compare? Which is more acidic? more
basic? Explain.
2. Differentiate between the terms strength and concentration as
they apply to acids and bases. When is HCl strong? Weak? Concentrated? Dilute? Answer the same questions for ammonia. Is
the conjugate base of a weak acid a strong base?
3. Sketch two graphs: (a) percent dissociation for weak acid HA
versus the initial concentration of HA ([HA]0) and (b) H concentration versus [HA]0. Explain both.
4. Consider a solution prepared by mixing a weak acid HA and
HCl. What are the major species? Explain what is occurring in
solution. How would you calculate the pH? What if you added
NaA to this solution? Then added NaOH?
5. Explain why salts can be acidic, basic, or neutral, and show examples. Do this without speciﬁc numbers.
6. Consider two separate aqueous solutions: one of a weak acid
HA and one of HCl. Assuming you started with 10 molecules
of each:
a. Draw a picture of what each solution looks like at equilibrium.
b. What are the major species in each beaker?
c. From your pictures, calculate the Ka values of each acid.
d. Order the following from the strongest to the weakest base:
H2O, A, Cl. Explain your order.
7. You are asked to calculate the H concentration in a solution of
NaOH(aq). Because sodium hydroxide is a base, can we say
there is no H, since having H would imply that the solution
is acidic?
8. Consider a solution prepared by mixing a weak acid HA, HCl,
and NaA. Which of the following statements best describes what
happens?

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.

a. The H from the HCl reacts completely with the A from
the NaA. Then the HA dissociates somewhat.
b. The H from the HCl reacts somewhat with the A from the
NaA to make HA, while the HA is dissociating. Eventually
you have equal amounts of everything.
c. The H from the HCl reacts somewhat with the A from the
NaA to make HA while the HA is dissociating. Eventually
all the reactions have equal rates.
d. The H from the HCl reacts completely with the A from
the NaA. Then the HA dissociates somewhat until “too much”
H and A are formed, so the H and A react to form HA,
and so on. Eventually equilibrium is reached.
Justify your choice, and for choices you did not pick, explain
what is wrong with them.
Consider a solution formed by mixing 100.0 mL of 0.10 M HA
(Ka  1.0  106 ), 100.00 mL of 0.10 M NaA, and 100.0 mL
of 0.10 M HCl. In calculating the pH for the ﬁnal solution,
you would make some assumptions about the order in which various reactions occur to simplify the calculations. State these
assumptions. Does it matter whether the reactions actually occur in the assumed order? Explain.
A certain sodium compound is dissolved in water to liberate Na
ions and a certain negative ion. What evidence would you look
for to determine whether the anion is behaving as an acid or a
base? How could you tell whether the anion is a strong base?
Explain how the anion could behave simultaneously as an acid
and a base.
Acids and bases can be thought of as chemical opposites (acids
are proton donors, and bases are proton acceptors). Therefore,
one might think that Ka  1 Kb. Why isn’t this the case? What
is the relationship between Ka and Kb? Prove it with a derivation.
Consider two solutions of the salts NaX(aq) and NaY(aq) at
equal concentrations. What would you need to know to determine which solution has the higher pH? Explain how you would
decide (perhaps even provide a sample calculation).
What is meant by pH? True or false: A strong acid solution
always has a lower pH than a weak acid solution. Explain.
Why is the pH of water at 25°C equal to 7.00?
Can the pH of a solution be negative? Explain.

Exercises
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
16. Why is H3O the strongest acid and OH the strongest base that
can exist in signiﬁcant amounts in aqueous solutions?
17. How many signiﬁcant ﬁgures are there in the numbers: 10.78,
6.78, 0.78? If these were pH values, to how many signiﬁcant
ﬁgures can you express the [H]? Explain any discrepancies
between your answers to the two questions.
18. In terms of orbitals and electron arrangements, what must be
present for a molecule or an ion to act as a Lewis acid? What
must be present for a molecule or an ion to act as a Lewis base?
19. Give three example solutions that ﬁt each of the following
descriptions.
a. A strong electrolyte solution that is very acidic.
b. A strong electrolyte solution that is slightly acidic.
c. A strong electrolyte solution that is very basic.
d. A strong electrolyte solution that is slightly basic.
e. A strong electrolyte solution that is neutral.
20. Derive an expression for the relationship between pKa and pKb
for a conjugate acid–base pair. (pK  log K.)
21. Consider the following statements. Write out an example reaction
and K expression that is associated with each statement.
a. The autoionization of water.
b. An acid reacts with water to produce the conjugate base of
the acid and the hydronium ion.
c. A base reacts with water to produce the conjugate acid of the
base and the hydroxide ion.
22. Which of the following statements is(are) true? Correct the false
statements.
a. When a base is dissolved in water, the lowest possible pH of
the solution is 7.0.
b. When an acid is dissolved in water, the lowest possible
pH is 0.
c. A strong acid solution will have a lower pH than a weak acid
solution.
d. A 0.0010 M Ba(OH)2 solution has a pOH that is twice the
pOH value of a 0.0010 M KOH solution.
23. Consider the following mathematical expressions.
a. [H ]  [HA] o
b. [H ]  (Ka  [HA] o ) 1 2
c. [OH ]  2[ B] o
d. [OH ]  (Kb  [B] o ) 1 2
For each expression, give three solutions where the mathematical expression would give a good approximation for the [H]
or [OH]. [Hao] and [B] represent initial concentrations of an acid
or a base.
24. Consider a 0.10 M H2CO3 solution and a 0.10 M H2SO4 solution.
Without doing any detailed calculations, choose one of the following statements that best describes the [H] of each solution and
explain your answer.
a. The [H] is less than 0.10 M.
b. The [H] is 0.10 M.

673

c. The [H] is between 0.10 M and 0.20 M.
d. The [H] is 0.20 M.
25. Of the hydrogen halides, only HF is a weak acid. Give a possible
explanation.
26. Explain why the following are done, both of which are related
to acid/base chemistry.
a. Power plants burning coal with high sulfur content use scrubbers to help eliminate sulfur emissions.
b. A gardener mixes lime (CaO) into the soil of his garden.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Nature of Acids and Bases
27. Write balanced equations that describe the following reactions.
a. the dissociation of perchloric acid in water
b. the dissociation of propanoic acid (CH3CH2CO2H) in water
c. the dissociation of ammonium ion in water
28. Write the dissociation reaction and the corresponding Ka equilibrium expression for each of the following acids in water.
a. HCN
b. HOC6H5
c. C6H5NH3
29. For each of the following aqueous reactions, identify the acid,
the base, the conjugate base, and the conjugate acid.
a. H2O  H2CO3 ∆ H3O   HCO3
b. C5H5NH   H2O ∆ C5H5N  H3O 
c. HCO3  C5H5NH ∆ H2CO3  C5H5N
30. For each of the following aqueous reactions, identify the acid,
the base, the conjugate base, and the conjugate acid.
a. Al(H2O) 63  H2O ∆ H3O  Al(H2O) 5 (OH) 2
b. H2O  HONH3 ∆ HONH2  H3O
c. HOCl  C6H5NH2 ∆ OCl  C6H5NH3
31. Classify each of the following as a strong acid or a weak acid.
H
O
Cl
a.

b.

c.

d.

S

32. Consider the following illustrations:

H+
A–
B–

674

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases
Which beaker best illustrates what happens when the following
acids are dissolved in water?
a. HNO2
d. HF
b. HNO3
e. HC2H3O2
c. HCl

c.
d.
e.
f.

pH  1.0
pH  3.20
pOH  5.0
pOH  9.60

43. Fill in the missing information in the following table.

33. Use Table 14.2 to order the following from the strongest to the
weakest acid.
HClO2, H2O, NH4, HClO4
34. Use Table 14.2 to order the following from the strongest to the
weakest base.
ClO2, H2O, NH3,

ClO4

35. You may need Table 14.2 to answer the following questions.
a. Which is the stronger acid, HCl or H2O?
b. Which is the stronger acid, H2O or HNO2?
c. Which is the stronger acid, HCN or HOC6H5?
36. You may need Table 14.2 to answer the following questions.
a. Which is the stronger base, Cl or H2O?
b. Which is the stronger base, H2O or NO2?
c. Which is the stronger base, CN or OC6H5?

Acidic, Basic,
pH
Solution a

pOH

[H]

[OH]

or Neutral?

6.88
8.4  1014 M

Solution b
3.11

Solution c

1.0  107 M

Solution d

44. Fill in the missing information in the following table.

Acidic, Basic,

Autoionization of Water and the pH Scale


37. Calculate the [OH ] of each of the following solutions at 25°C.
Identify each solution as neutral, acidic, or basic.
a. 3H 4  1.0  107 M
c. 3H 4  12 M

16
b. 3H 4  8.3  10 M
d. 3H 4  5.4  105 M

38. Calculate the [H ] of each of the following solutions at 25°C.
Identify each solution as neutral, acidic, or basic.
a. 3OH 4  1.5 M
c. 3OH 4  1.0  107 M
b. 3OH 4  3.6  1015 M
d. 3OH 4  7.3  104 M
39. Values of Kw as a function of temperature are as follows:

a.
b.
40. At
a.
b.
c.

Temperature (°C)

Kw

0
25
35
40.
50.

1.14  1015
1.00  1014
2.09  1014
2.92  1014
5.47  1014

Is the autoionization of water exothermic or endothermic?
Calculate [H] and [OH ] in a neutral solution at 50.°C.
40°C the value of Kw is 2.92  1014.
Calculate the [H] and [OH ] in pure water at 40°C.
What is the pH of pure water at 40°C?
If the hydroxide ion concentration in a solution is 0.10 M,
what is the pH at 40°C?

41. Calculate the pH and pOH of the solutions in Exercises 37
and 38.
42. Calculate [H] and [OH ] for each solution at 25°C. Identify
each solution as neutral, acidic, or basic.
a. pH  7.40 (the normal pH of blood)
b. pH  15.3

pH
Solution a

pOH

[H]

[OH]

or Neutral?

9.63
3.9  106 M

Solution b
0.027 M

Solution c
Solution d

12.2

45. The pH of a sample of gastric juice in a person’s stomach is 2.1.
Calculate the pOH, [H  ], and [OH ] for this sample. Is gastric
juice acidic or basic?
46. The pOH of a sample of baking soda dissolved in water is 5.74
at 25°C. Calculate the pH, [H], and [OH ] for this sample. Is
the solution acidic or basic?

Solutions of Acids
47. What are the major species present in 0.250 M solutions of each
of the following acids? Calculate the pH of each of these
solutions.
a. HClO4
b. HNO3
48. Calculate the pH of each of the following solutions of a strong
acid in water.
a. 0.10 M HCl
c. 1.0  1011 M HCl
b. 5.0 M HCl
49. A solution is prepared by adding 50.0 mL of 0.050 M HCl to
150.0 mL of 0.10 M HNO3. Calculate the concentrations of all
species in this solution.
50. A solution is prepared by mixing 90.0 mL of 5.00 M HCl and
30.0 mL of 8.00 M HNO3. Water is then added until the ﬁnal
volume is 1.00 L. Calculate [H], [OH ] , and the pH for this
solution.

Exercises
51. How would you prepare 1600 mL of a pH  1.50 solution using
concentrated (12 M) HCl?
52. What mass of HNO3 is present in 250.0 mL of a nitric acid
solution having a pH  5.10?
53. What are the major species present in 0.250 M solutions of
each of the following acids? Calculate the pH of each of these
solutions.
a. HNO2
b. CH3CO2H (HC2H3O2)
54. What are the major species present in 0.250 M solutions of each
of the following acids? Calculate the pH of each of these
solutions.
a. HOC6H5
b. HCN
55. A 0.0560-g sample of acetic acid is added to enough water to
make 50.00 mL of solution. Calculate [H  ], [CH3COO ],
[CH3COOH], and the pH at equilibrium. Ka for acetic acid is
1.8  105.
56. For propanoic acid (HC3H5O2, Ka  1.3  105 ), determine the
concentration of all species present, the pH, and the percent
dissociation of a 0.100 M solution.
57. Calculate the concentration of all species present and the pH of
a 0.020 M HF solution.
58. Calculate the pH of a 0.20 M solution of iodic acid
(HIO3, Ka  0.17).
59. Monochloroacetic acid, HC2H2ClO2, is a skin irritant that is used
in “chemical peels” intended to remove the top layer of dead
skin from the face and ultimately improve the complexion. The
value of Ka for monochloroacetic acid is 1.35  103. Calculate
the pH of a 0.10 M solution of monochloroacetic acid.
60. A typical aspirin tablet contains 325 mg of acetylsalicylic acid,
HC9H7O4. Calculate the pH of a solution that is prepared by
dissolving two aspirin tablets in one cup (237 mL) of solution.
Assume the aspirin tablets are pure acetylsalicylic acid,
Ka  3.3  104.
61. Calculate the pH of each of the following.
a. a solution containing 0.10 M HCl and 0.10 M HOCl
b. a solution containing 0.050 M HNO3 and 0.50 M HC2H3O2.
62. Calculate the pH of a solution that contains 1.0 M HF and 1.0 M
HOC6H5. Also calculate the concentration of OC6H5 in this solution at equilibrium.
63. Calculate the percent dissociation of the acid in each of the following solutions.
a. 0.50 M acetic acid
b. 0.050 M acetic acid
c. 0.0050 M acetic acid
d. Use Le Châtelier’s principle to explain why percent dissociation increases as the concentration of a weak acid decreases.
e. Even though the percent dissociation increases from solutions
a to c, the [H] decreases. Explain.
64. Using the Ka values in Table 14.2, calculate the percent dissociation in a 0.20 M solution of each of the following acids.
a. nitric acid (HNO3)
b. nitrous acid (HNO2)
c. phenol (HOC6H5)

675

d. How is percent dissociation of an acid related to the Ka value
for the acid (assuming equal initial concentrations of acids)?
65. A 0.15 M solution of a weak acid is 3.0% dissociated. Calculate Ka.
66. An acid HX is 25% dissociated in water. If the equilibrium concentration of HX is 0.30 M, calculate the Ka value for HX.
67. The pH of a 1.00  102 M solution of cyanic acid (HOCN) is
2.77 at 25°C. Calculate Ka for HOCN from this result.
68. Trichloroacetic acid (CCl3CO2H) is a corrosive acid that is used
to precipitate proteins. The pH of a 0.050 M solution of
trichloroacetic acid is the same as the pH of a 0.040 M HClO4
solution. Calculate Ka for trichloroacetic acid.
69. A solution of formic acid (HCOOH, Ka  1.8  104 ) has a pH
of 2.70. Calculate the initial concentration of formic acid in this
solution.
70. One mole of a weak acid HA was dissolved in 2.0 L of solution.
After the system had come to equilibrium, the concentration of
HA was found to be 0.45 M. Calculate Ka for HA.

Solutions of Bases
71. Write the reaction and
pression for each of the
water.
a. NH3
b. C5H5N
72. Write the reaction and
pression for each of the
water.
a. aniline, C6H5NH2

the corresponding Kb equilibrium exfollowing substances acting as bases in

the corresponding Kb equilibrium exfollowing substances acting as bases in
b. dimethylamine, (CH3)2NH

73. Use Table 14.3 to help order the following bases from strongest
to weakest.
NO3,

H2O, NH3, C5H5N

74. Use Table 14.3 to help order the following acids from strongest
to weakest.
HNO3,

H2O, NH4,

C5H5NH

75. Use Table 14.3 to help answer the following questions.
a. Which is the stronger base, ClO4 or C6H5NH2?
b. Which is the stronger base, H2O or C6H5NH2?
c. Which is the stronger base, OH or C6H5NH2?
d. Which is the stronger base, C6H5NH2 or CH3NH2?
76. Use Table 14.3 to help answer the following questions.
a. Which is the stronger acid, HClO4 or C6H5NH3?
b. Which is the stronger acid, H2O or C6H5NH3?
c. Which is the stronger acid, C6H5NH3 or CH3NH3?
77. Calculate the pH of the following solutions.
a. 0.10 M NaOH
b. 1.0  1010 M NaOH
c. 2.0 M NaOH
78. Calculate [OH ] , pOH, and pH for each of the following.
a. 0.00040 M Ca(OH)2
b. a solution containing 25 g of KOH per liter
c. a solution containing 150.0 g of NaOH per liter

676

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

79. What are the major species present in 0.015 M solutions of each
of the following bases?
a. KOH
b. Ba(OH)2
What is [OH ] and the pH of each of these solutions?
80. What are the major species present in the following mixtures of
bases?
a. 0.050 M NaOH and 0.050 M LiOH
b. 0.0010 M Ca(OH)2 and 0.020 M RbOH
What is [OH ] and the pH of each of these solutions?
81. What mass of KOH is necessary to prepare 800.0 mL of a solution having a pH  11.56?
82. Calculate the concentration of an aqueous Sr(OH)2 that has
pH  10.50.
83. What are the major species present in a 0.150 M NH3 solution?
Calculate the [OH ] and the pH of this solution.
84. For the reaction of hydrazine (N2H4) in water,
H2NNH2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H2NNH3 1aq2  OH 1aq2

Kb is 3.0  106. Calculate the concentrations of all species and
the pH of a 2.0 M solution of hydrazine in water.
85. Calculate [OH ] , [H], and the pH of 0.20 M solutions of each
of the following amines.
a. triethylamine [(C2H5 ) 3N, Kb  4.0  104 ]
b. hydroxylamine (HONH2, Kb  1.1  108 )
86. Calculate [OH ] , [H], and the pH of 0.20 M solutions of each
of the following amines (the Kb values are found in Table 14.3).
a. aniline
b. methylamine
87. Calculate the pH of a 0.20 M C2H5NH2 solution (Kb 
5.6  104 ).
88. Calculate the pH of a 0.050 M (C2H5)2NH solution (Kb  1.3 
103 ).
89. Calculate the percent ionization in each of the following solutions.
a. 0.10 M NH3
b. 0.010 M NH3
90. Calculate the percentage of pyridine (C5H5N) that forms pyridinium ion, C5H5NH  , in a 0.10 M aqueous solution of pyridine
(Kb  1.7  109 ).
91. Codeine (C18H21NO3) is a derivative of morphine that is used as
an analgesic, narcotic, or antitussive. It was once commonly used
in cough syrups but is now available only by prescription because of its addictive properties. If the pH of a 1.7  103 M
solution of codeine is 9.59, calculate Kb.
92. Calculate the mass of HONH2 required to dissolve in enough
water to make 250.0 mL of solution having a pH of 10.00.
(Kb  1.1  108.)

Polyprotic Acids
93. Write out the stepwise Ka reactions for the diprotic acid H2SO3.
94. Write out the stepwise Ka reactions for citric acid (H3C6H5O7),
a triprotic acid.
95. Using the Ka values in Table 14.4 and only the ﬁrst dissociation
step, calculate the pH of 0.10 M solutions of each of the following polyprotic acids.
a. H3PO4
b. H2CO3

96. Arsenic acid (H3AsO4) is a triprotic acid with Ka1  5  103,
Ka2  8  108, and Ka3  6  1010. Calculate [H], [OH],
[H3AsO4], [H2AsO4], [HAsO42], and [AsO43] in a 0.20 M
arsenic acid solution.
97. Calculate the pH of a 2.0 M H2SO4 solution.
98. Calculate the pH of a 5.0  103 M solution of H2SO4.

Acid–Base Properties of Salts
99. Arrange the following 0.10 M solutions in order of most acidic
to most basic.
KOH, KCl,

KCN, NH4Cl,

HCl

100. Arrange the following 0.10 M solutions in order from most acidic
to most basic. See Appendix 5 for Ka and Kb values.
CaBr2,

KNO2,

HClO4, HNO2,

HONH3ClO4

101. Given that the Ka value for acetic acid is 1.8  105 and the Ka
value for hypochlorous acid is 3.5  108, which is the stronger
base, OCl or C2H3O2?
102. The Kb values for ammonia and methylamine are 1.8  105 and
4.4  104, respectively. Which is the stronger acid, NH4 or
CH3NH3?
103. Sodium azide (NaN3) is sometimes added to water to kill
bacteria. Calculate the concentration of all species in a 0.010 M
solution of NaN3. The Ka value for hydrazoic acid (HN3) is
1.9  105.
104. Calculate the concentrations of all species present in a 0.25 M
solution of ethylammonium chloride (C2H5NH3Cl).
105. Calculate the pH of each of the following solutions.
a. 0.10 M CH3NH3Cl
b. 0.050 M NaCN
106. Calculate the pH of each of the following solutions.
a. 0.12 M KNO2
c. 0.40 M NH4ClO4
b. 0.45 M NaOCl
107. An unknown salt is either NaCN, NaC2H3O2, NaF, NaCl, or
NaOCl. When 0.100 mol of the salt is dissolved in 1.00 L of
solution, the pH of the solution is 8.07. What is the identity of
the salt?
108. Consider a solution of an unknown salt having the general formula BHCl, where B is one of the weak bases in Table 14.3. A
0.10 M solution of the unknown salt has a pH of 5.82. What is
the actual formula of the salt?
109. Calculate the pH of a 0.050 M Al(NO3)3 solution. The Ka value
for Al(H2O)63 is 1.4  105.
110. Calculate the pH of a 0.10 M CoCl3 solution. The Ka value for
Co(H2O)63 is 1.0  105.
111. Are solutions of the following salts acidic, basic, or neutral? For
those that are not neutral, write balanced chemical equations for
the reactions causing the solution to be acidic or basic. The relevant Ka and Kb values are found in Tables 14.2 and 14.3.
a. NaNO3
c. C5H5NHClO4
e. KOCl
b. NaNO2
d. NH4NO2
f. NH4OCl
112. Are solutions of the following salts acidic, basic, or neutral?
For those that are not neutral, write balanced equations for the

Additional Exercises
reactions causing the solution to be acidic or basic. The relevant
Ka and Kb values are found in Tables 14.2 and 14.3.
a. KCl
c. CH3NH3Cl
e. NH4F
b. NH4C2H3O2
d. KF
f. CH3NH3CN

Relationships Between Structure and Strengths of
Acids and Bases
113. Place the species in each of the following groups in order of increasing acid strength. Explain the order you chose for each
group.
a. HIO3, HBrO3
c. HOCl, HOI
b. HNO2, HNO3
d. H3PO4, H3PO3
114. Place the species in each of the following groups in order of increasing base strength. Give your reasoning in each case.
a. IO3, BrO3
b. NO2, NO3
c. OCl, OI
115. Place the species in each of the following groups in order of increasing acid strength.
a. H2O, H2S, H2Se (bond energies: HOO, 467 kJ/mol; HOS,
363 kJ/mol; HOSe, 276 kJ/mol)
b. CH3CO2H, FCH2CO2H, F2CHCO2H, F3CCO2H
c. NH4, HONH3
d. NH4, PH4(bond energies: NOH, 391 kJ/mol; POH, 322
kJ/mol)
Give reasons for the orders you chose.
116. Using your results from Exercise 115, place the species in each
of the following groups in order of increasing base strength.
a. OH, SH, SeH
b. NH3, PH3
c. NH3, HONH2

677

123. Would you expect Fe3 or Fe2 to be the stronger Lewis acid?
Explain.
124. Use the Lewis acid–base model to explain the following reaction.
CO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2CO3 1aq2

Additional Exercises
125. A 10.0-mL sample of an HCl solution has a pH of 2.000. What
volume of water must be added to change the pH to 4.000?
126. Which of the following represent conjugate acid–base pairs? For
those pairs that are not conjugates, write the correct conjugate
acid or base for each species in the pair.
a. H2O, OH
c. H3PO4, H2PO4
b. H2SO4, SO42
d. HC2H3O2, C2H3O2
127. A solution is made by adding 50.0 mL of 0.200 M acetic acid
(Ka  1.8  105 ) to 50.0 mL of 1.00  103 M HCl.
a. Calculate the pH of the solution.
b. Calculate the acetate ion concentration.
128. You have 100.0 g of saccharin, a sugar substitute, and you want
to prepare a pH  5.75 solution. What volume of solution can
be prepared? For saccharin, HC7H4NSO3, pKa  11.70 (pKa 
log Ka ).
129. A solution is tested for pH and conductivity as pictured below:

117. Will the following oxides give acidic, basic, or neutral solutions when dissolved in water? Write reactions to justify your
answers.
a. CaO
b. SO2
c. Cl2O
118. Will the following oxides give acidic, basic, or neutral solutions when dissolved in water? Write reactions to justify your
answers.
a. Li2O
b. CO2
c. SrO

Lewis Acids and Bases
119. Identify the Lewis acid and the Lewis base in each of the following reactions.
a. B(OH) 3 (aq)  H2O(l) ∆ B(OH) 4 (aq)  H (aq)
b. Ag (aq)  2NH3 (aq) ∆ Ag(NH3 ) 2 (aq)
c. BF3 (g)  F (aq) ∆ BF4 (aq)
120. Identify the Lewis acid and the Lewis base in each of the
following reactions.
a. Fe3 (aq)  6H2O(l) ∆ Fe(H2O) 63 (aq)
b. H2O(l)  CN (aq) ∆ HCN(aq)  OH (aq)
c. HgI2 (s)  2I (aq) ∆ HgI42 (aq)
121. Aluminum hydroxide is an amphoteric substance. It can act as
either a Brønsted–Lowry base or a Lewis acid. Write a reaction
showing Al(OH)3 acting as a base toward H and as an acid
toward OH.
122. Zinc hydroxide is an amphoteric substance. Write equations that
describe Zn(OH)2 acting as a Brønsted–Lowry base toward H
and as a Lewis acid toward OH.

130.
131.

132.
133.

134.

The solution contains one of the following substances: HCl,
NaOH, NH4Cl, HCN, NH3, HF, or NaCN. If the solute concentration is about 1.0 M, what is the identity of the solute?
A 0.25-g sample of lime (CaO) is dissolved in enough water to
make 1500 mL of solution. Calculate the pH of the solution.
At 25°C, a saturated solution of benzoic acid (Ka  6.4  105 )
has a pH of 2.80. Calculate the water solubility of benzoic acid
in moles per liter.
Calculate the pH and [S2] in a 0.10 M H2S solution. Assume
Ka1  1.0  107; Ka2  1.0  1019.
A typical vitamin C tablet (containing pure ascorbic acid,
H2C6H6O6) weighs 500. mg. One vitamin C tablet is dissolved
in enough water to make 200.0 mL of solution. Calculate the pH
of this solution. Ascorbic acid is a diprotic acid.
Calculate the pH of an aqueous solution containing 1.0  102 M
HCl, 1.0  102 M H2SO4, and 1.0  102 M HCN.

678

Chapter Fourteen Acids and Bases

135. Acrylic acid (CH2 “ CHCO2H) is a precursor for many important plastics. Ka for acrylic acid is 5.6  105.
a. Calculate the pH of a 0.10 M solution of acrylic acid.
b. Calculate the percent dissociation of a 0.10 M solution of
acrylic acid.
c. Calculate the pH of a 0.050 M solution of sodium acrylate
(NaC3H3O2).
136. A 0.20 M sodium chlorobenzoate (NaC7H4ClO2) solution has a
pH of 8.65. Calculate the pH of a 0.20 M chlorobenzoic acid
(HC7H4ClO2) solution.
137. The equilibrium constant Ka for the reaction
Fe1H2O2 63 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆
Fe1H2O2 5 1OH2 2 1aq2  H3O 1aq2
is 6.0  103.
a. Calculate the pH of a 0.10 M solution of Fe(H2O)63.
b. Will a 1.0 M solution of iron(II) nitrate have a higher or lower
pH than a 1.0 M solution of iron(III) nitrate? Explain.
138. Rank the following 0.10 M solutions in order of increasing pH.
a. HI, HF, NaF, NaI
b. NH4Br, HBr, KBr, NH3
c. C6H5NH3NO3, NaNO3, NaOH, HOC6H5, KOC6H5, C6H5NH2,
HNO3
139. Is an aqueous solution of NaHSO4 acidic, basic, or neutral? What
reaction occurs with water? Calculate the pH of a 0.10 M solution of NaHSO4.
140. Calculate [CO32 ] in a 0.010 M solution of CO2 in water
(H2CO3). If all the CO32 in this solution comes from the reaction
HCO3 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  CO32 1aq2
what percentage of the H ions in the solution is a result of the
dissociation of HCO3? When acid is added to a solution of
sodium hydrogen carbonate (NaHCO3), vigorous bubbling occurs. How is this reaction related to the existence of carbonic
acid (H2CO3) molecules in aqueous solution?
141. Hemoglobin (abbreviated Hb) is a protein that is responsible for
the transport of oxygen in the blood of mammals. Each hemoglobin molecule contains four iron atoms that are the binding
sites for O2 molecules. The oxygen binding is pH dependent.
The relevant equilibrium reaction is
HbH44 1aq2  4O2 1g2 ∆ Hb1O2 2 4 1aq2  4H 1aq2
Use Le Châtelier’s principle to answer the following.
a. What form of hemoglobin, HbH44 or Hb(O2)4, is favored in
the lungs? What form is favored in the cells?
b. When a person hyperventilates, the concentration of CO2 in
the blood is decreased. How does this affect the oxygen-binding equilibrium? How does breathing into a paper bag help
to counteract this effect?
c. When a person has suffered a cardiac arrest, injection of a
sodium bicarbonate solution is given. Why is this necessary?
142. Calculate the value for the equilibrium constant for each of the
following aqueous reactions.
a. NH3  H3O ∆ NH4  H2O
b. NO2  H3O ∆ HNO2  H2O
c. NH4  OH ∆ NH3  H2O
d. HNO2  OH ∆ H2O  NO2

143. Students are often surprised to learn that organic acids, such as
acetic acid, contain —OH groups. Actually, all oxyacids contain
hydroxyl groups. Sulfuric acid, usually written as H2SO4, has the
structural formula SO2(OH)2, where S is the central atom. Identify the acids whose structural formulas are shown below. Why
do they behave as acids, while NaOH and KOH are bases?
a. SO(OH)2
b. ClO2(OH)
c. HPO(OH)2

Challenge Problems
144. The pH of 1.0  108 M hydrochloric acid is not 8.00. The correct pH can be calculated by considering the relationship between
the molarities of the three principal ions in the solution (H  ,
Cl, and OH). These molarities can be calculated from algebraic
equations that can be derived from the considerations given below.
a. The solution is electrically neutral.
b. The hydrochloric acid can be assumed to be 100% ionized.
c. The product of the molarities of the hydronium ions and the
hydroxide ions must equal Kw.
Calculate the pH of a 1.0  108 HCl solution.
145. Calculate the pH of a 1.0  107 M solution of NaOH in water.
146. Calculate [OH ] in a 3.0  107 M solution of Ca(OH)2.
147. Consider 50.0 mL of a solution of weak acid HA 
Ka (1.00  106 ), which has a pH of 4.000. What volume of water must be added to make the pH  5.000?
148. Making use of the assumptions we ordinarily make in calculating the pH of an aqueous solution of a weak acid, calculate the
pH of a 1.0  106 M solution of hypobromous acid
(HBrO, Ka  2  109 ) . What is wrong with your answer? Why
is it wrong? Without trying to solve the problem, tell what has
to be included to solve the problem correctly.
149. Calculate the pH of a 0.200 M solution of C5H5NHF. Hint:
C5H5NHF is a salt composed of C5H5NH and F ions. The principal equilibrium in this solution is the best acid reacting with
the best base; the reaction for the principal equilibrium is
C5H5NH 1aq2  F 1aq2 ∆
C5H5N1aq2  HF1aq2

K  8.2  103

150. Determine the pH of a 0.50 M solution of NH4OCl. See Exercise 149.
151. Calculate 3OH 4 in a solution obtained by adding 0.0100 mol
of solid NaOH to 1.00 L of 15.0 M NH3.
152. What mass of NaOH(s) must be added to 1.0 L of 0.050 M NH3
to ensure that the percent ionization of NH3 is no greater than
0.0010%? Assume no volume change on addition of NaOH.
153. A certain acid, HA, has a vapor density of 5.11 g/L when in the
gas phase at a temperature of 25°C and a pressure of 1.00 atm.
When 1.50 g of this acid is dissolved in enough water to make
100.0 mL of solution, the pH is found to be 1.80. Calculate Ka
for the acid.
154. Calculate the mass of sodium hydroxide that must be added to
1.00 L of 1.00 M HC2H3O2 to double the pH of the solution
(assume that the NaOH does not change the volume of the
solution).
155. Consider the species PO43, HPO4 2, and H2PO4. Each ion can
act as a base in water. Determine the Kb value for each of these
species. Which species is the strongest base?

Marathon Problems
156. Calculate the pH of a 0.10 M solution of sodium phosphate. See
Exercise 155.
157. Will 0.10 M solutions of the following salts be acidic, basic, or
neutral? See Appendix 5 for Ka values.
a. ammonium bicarbonate
b. sodium dihydrogen phosphate
c. sodium hydrogen phosphate
d. ammonium dihydrogen phosphate
e. ammonium formate
158. a. The principal equilibrium in a solution of NaHCO3 is
HCO31aq2  HCO31aq2 ∆ H2CO3 1aq2  CO321aq2

Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant for this
reaction.
b. At equilibrium, what is the relationship between [H2CO3] and
[CO32 ]?
c. Using the equilibrium
H2CO3 1aq2 ∆ 2H 1aq2  CO32 1aq2
derive an expression for the pH of the solution in terms of
Ka1 and Ka2 using the result from part b.
d. What is the pH of a solution of NaHCO3?
159. A 0.100-g sample of the weak acid HA (molar mass  100.0
g/mol) is dissolved in 500.0 g of water. The freezing point of the
resulting solution is 0.0056°C. Calculate the value of Ka for
this acid. Assume molarity equals molarity in this solution.
160. A sample containing 0.0500 mol of Fe2(SO4)3 is dissolved in
enough water to make 1.00 L of solution. This solution contains
hydrated SO42 and Fe(H2O)63 ions. The latter behaves as an acid:
Fe1H2O2 63 1aq2 ∆ Fe1H2O2 5OH2 1aq2  H 1aq2

a. Calculate the expected osmotic pressure of this solution at
25°C if the above dissociation is negligible.
b. The actual osmotic pressure of the solution is 6.73 atm
at 25°C. Calculate Ka for the dissociation reaction of
Fe(H2O)63. (To do this calculation, you must assume that
none of the ions goes through the semipermeable membrane.
Actually, this is not a great assumption for the tiny H ion.)

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

161. A 2.14-g sample of sodium hypoiodite is dissolved in water to
make 1.25 L of solution. The solution pH is 11.32. What is Kb
for the hypoiodite ion?
162. Isocyanic acid (HNCO) can be prepared by heating sodium
cyanate in the presence of solid oxalic acid according to the
equation

679

163. Papaverine hydrochloride (abbreviated papH  Cl; molar mass 
378.85 g/mol) is a drug that belongs to a group of medicines
called vasodilators, which cause blood vessels to expand, thereby
increasing blood ﬂow. This drug is the conjugate acid of the weak
base papaverine (abbreviated pap; Kb  8.33  109 at 35.0°C).
Calculate the pH of a 30.0 mg/mL aqueous dose of papH  Cl
prepared at 35.0°C. Kw at 35.0°C is 2.1  1014.

Marathon Problems*
These problems are designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

164. Captain Kirk, of the Starship Enterprise, has been told by his
superiors that only a chemist can be trusted with the combination to the safe containing the dilithium crystals that power the
ship. The combination is the pH of solution A, described below,
followed by the pH of solution C. (Example: If the pH of solution A is 3.47 and that of solution C is 8.15, then the combination to the safe is 3-47-8-15.) The chemist must determine the
combination using only the information below (all solutions are
at 25°C):
Solution A is 50.0 mL of a 0.100 M solution of the weak monoprotic acid HX.
Solution B is a 0.0500 M solution of the salt NaX. It has a pH
of 10.02.
Solution C is made by adding 15.0 mL of 0.250 M KOH to solution A.
What is the combination to the safe?
165. For the following, mix equal volumes of one solution from Group
I with one solution from Group II to achieve the indicated pH.
Calculate the pH of each solution.
Group I: 0.20 M NH4Cl, 0.20 M HCl, 0.20 M C6H5NH3Cl, 0.20
M (C2H5)3NHCl
Group II: 0.20 M KOI, 0.20 M NaCN, 0.20 M KOCl, 0.20 M
NaNO2
a. the solution with the lowest pH
b. the solution with the highest pH
c. the solution with the pH closest to 7.00
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

2NaOCN1s2  H2C2O4 1s2 ¡ 2HNCO1l2  Na2C2O4 1s2
Upon isolating pure HNCO(l), an aqueous solution of HNCO
can be prepared by dissolving the liquid HNCO in water.
What is the pH of a 100.-mL solution of HNCO prepared from
the reaction of 10.0 g each of NaOCN and H2C2O4, assuming
all of the HNCO produced is dissolved in solution? (Ka of
HNCO  1.2  104.)

*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 68,
No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of Chemical
Education, Inc.

15

Applications of Aqueous
Equilibria

Contents
Acid–Base Equilibria
15.1 Solutions of Acids or Bases
Containing a Common Ion
• Equilibrium Calculations
15.2 Buffered Solutions
• Buffering: How Does It Work
15.3 Buffering Capacity
15.4 Titrations and pH Curves
• Strong Acid–Strong Base
Titrations
• Titrations of Weak Acids with
Strong Bases
• Calculation of Ka
• Titrations of Weak Bases with
Strong Acids
15.5 Acid–Base Indicators
Solubility Equilibria
15.6 Solubility Equilibria and the
Solubility Product
• Relative Solubilities
• Common Ion Effect
• pH and Solubility
15.7 Precipitation and
Qualitative Analysis
• Selective Precipitation
• Qualitative Analysis
Complex Ion Equilibria
15.8 Equilibria Involving
Complex Ions
• Complex Ions and Solubility

Stalactites are formed when carbonate minerals dissolve in ground water acidiﬁed by carbon dioxide
and then solidify when the water evaporates.

680

M

uch important chemistry, including almost all the chemistry of the natural world,
occurs in aqueous solution. We have already introduced one very signiﬁcant class of aqueous equilibria, acid–base reactions. In this chapter we consider more applications of
acid–base chemistry and introduce two additional types of aqueous equilibria, those involving the solubility of salts and those involving the formation of complex ions.
The interplay of acid–base, solubility, and complex ion equilibria is often important
in natural processes, such as the weathering of minerals, the uptake of nutrients by plants,
and tooth decay. For example, limestone (CaCO3) will dissolve in water made acidic by
dissolved carbon dioxide:

CO2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2
H 1aq2  CaCO3 1s2 ∆ Ca2 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2


This two-step process and its reverse account for the formation of limestone caves and the
stalactites and stalagmites found therein. In the forward direction of the process, the acidic
water (containing carbon dioxide) dissolves the underground limestone deposits, thereby
forming a cavern. The reverse process occurs as the water drips from the ceiling of the
cave, and the carbon dioxide is lost to the air. This causes solid calcium carbonate to form,
producing stalactites on the ceiling and stalagmites where the drops hit the cave ﬂoor.
Before we consider the other types of aqueous equilibria, we will deal with acid–base
equilibria in more detail.

Acid–Base Equilibria

15.1

Solutions of Acids or Bases Containing a
Common Ion

In Chapter 14 we were concerned with calculating the equilibrium concentrations of
species (particularly H ions) in solutions containing an acid or a base. In this section we
discuss solutions that contain not only the weak acid HA but also its salt NaA. Although
this appears to be a new type of problem, we will see that this case can be handled rather
easily using the procedures developed in Chapter 14.
Suppose we have a solution containing the weak acid hydroﬂuoric acid (HF,
Ka  7.2  104 ) and its salt sodium ﬂuoride (NaF). Recall that when a salt dissolves in
water, it breaks up completely into its ions—it is a strong electrolyte:
NaF1s2 ¬¡ Na 1aq2  F 1aq2
H2O1l2

Since hydroﬂuoric acid is a weak acid and only slightly dissociated, the major species
in the solution are HF, Na, F, and H2O. The common ion in this solution is F, since
it is produced by both hydroﬂuoric acid and sodium ﬂuoride. What effect does the presence of the dissolved sodium ﬂuoride have on the dissociation equilibrium of hydroﬂuoric
acid?
To answer this question, we compare the extent of dissociation of hydroﬂuoric acid
in two different solutions, the ﬁrst containing 1.0 M HF and the second containing 1.0 M HF

681

682

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
and 1.0 M NaF. By Le Châtelier’s principle, we would expect the dissociation equilibrium
for HF
HF1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  F 1aq2
in the second solution to be driven to the left by the presence of F  ions from the NaF.
Thus the extent of dissociation of HF will be less in the presence of dissolved NaF:
HF1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  F 1aq2

Equilibrium shifts
away from added
component. Fewer
H ions present.

The common ion effect is an application
of Le Châtelier’s principle.

Added F ions
from NaF

The shift in equilibrium position that occurs because of the addition of an ion already involved in the equilibrium reaction is called the common ion effect. This effect makes a
solution of NaF and HF less acidic than a solution of HF alone.
The common ion effect is quite general. For example, solid NH4Cl added to a 1.0 M
NH3 solution produces additional ammonium ions:
NH4Cl1s2 ¡ NH4 1aq2  Cl 1aq2
H2O

and this causes the position of the ammonia–water equilibrium to shift to the left:
NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2

This reduces the equilibrium concentration of OH ions.
The common ion effect is also important in solutions of polyprotic acids. The production of protons by the ﬁrst dissociation step greatly inhibits the succeeding dissociation steps, which, of course, also produce protons, the common ion in this case. We will
see later in this chapter that the common ion effect is also important in dealing with the
solubility of salts.

Equilibrium Calculations
The procedures for ﬁnding the pH of a solution containing a weak acid or base plus a
common ion are very similar to the procedures, which we covered in Chapter 14, for solutions containing the acids or bases alone. For example, in the case of a weak acid, the
only important difference is that the initial concentration of the anion A is not zero in a
solution that also contains the salt NaA. Sample Exercise 15.1 illustrates a typical example using the same general approach we developed in Chapter 14.
Sample Exercise 15.1

Acidic Solutions Containing Common Ions
In Section 14.5 we found that the equilibrium concentration of H in a 1.0 M HF solution is 2.7  102 M, and the percent dissociation of HF is 2.7%. Calculate [H] and the
percent dissociation of HF in a solution containing 1.0 M HF (Ka  7.2  104 ) and
1.0 M NaF.

15.1 Solutions of Acids or Bases Containing a Common Ion
Major Species
F–
Na+
HF
H2O

683

Solution
As the aqueous solutions we consider become more complex, it is more important than
ever to be systematic and to focus on the chemistry occurring in the solution before thinking about mathematical procedures. The way to do this is always to write the major species
ﬁrst and consider the chemical properties of each one.
In a solution containing 1.0 M HF and 1.0 M NaF, the major species are
F,

HF,

Na,

and H2O



We know that Na ions have neither acidic nor basic properties and that water is a very
weak acid (or base). Therefore, the important species are HF and F, which participate
in the acid dissociation equilibrium that controls [H] in this solution. That is, the position of the equilibrium
HF1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  F 1aq2

will determine [H] in the solution. The equilibrium expression is
3H 4 3 F 4

Ka 

3HF4

 7.2  104

The important concentrations are shown in the following table.
Initial
Concentration (mol/L)

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)

[HF] 0  1.0
(from dissolved HF)
[F ] 0  1.0
(from dissolved NaF)
[H ] 0  0
(neglect contribution from H2O)

[HF]  1.0  x
[F ]  1.0  x

x mol/L HF
dissociates
¬¬¬¬¬¡

[H ]  x

Note that [F ] 0  1.0 M because of the dissolved sodium ﬂuoride and that at equilibrium [F ] 7 1.0 M because when the acid dissociates it produces F as well as H. Then
Ka  7.2  104 

3H 4 3 F 4
1x211.0  x2
1x211.02


3HF4
1.0  x
1.0

(since x is expected to be small).
Solving for x gives
x

1.0
17.2  104 2  7.2  104
1.0

Noting that x is small compared to 1.0, we conclude that this result is acceptable. Thus
3H 4  x  7.2  104 M

1The pH is 3.14.2

The percent dissociation of HF in this solution is

3H 4
7.2  104 M
 100 
 100  0.072%
3HF4 0
1.0 M

Compare these values for [H] and percent dissociation of HF with those for a 1.0
M HF solution, where [H]  2.7  102 M and the percent dissociation is 2.7%. The
large difference shows clearly that the presence of the F ions from the dissolved NaF
greatly inhibits the dissociation of HF. The position of the acid dissociation equilibrium
has been shifted to the left by the presence of F ions from NaF.
See Exercises 15.25 and 15.26.

684

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

15.2

The most important buffering system in
the blood involves HCO3 and H2CO3.

The systematic approach developed in
Chapter 14 for weak acids and bases
applies to buffered solutions.

Sample Exercise 15.2
Notice as you do this problem that it is
exactly like examples you have seen in
Chapter 14.

Buffered Solutions

The most important application of acid–base solutions containing a common ion is for
buffering. A buffered solution is one that resists a change in its pH when either hydroxide
ions or protons are added. The most important practical example of a buffered solution is
our blood, which can absorb the acids and bases produced in biologic reactions without
changing its pH. A constant pH for blood is vital because cells can survive only in a very
narrow pH range.
A buffered solution may contain a weak acid and its salt (for example, HF and NaF)
or a weak base and its salt (for example, NH3 and NH4Cl). By choosing the appropriate
components, a solution can be buffered at virtually any pH.
In treating buffered solutions in this chapter, we will start by considering the equilibrium calculations. We will then use these results to show how buffering works. That is,
we will answer the question: How does a buffered solution resist changes in pH when an
acid or a base is added?
As you do the calculations associated with buffered solutions, keep in mind that these
are merely solutions containing weak acids or bases, and the procedures required are the
same ones we have already developed. Be sure to use the systematic approach introduced
in Chapter 14.

The pH of a Buffered Solution I
A buffered solution contains 0.50 M acetic acid (HC2H3O2, Ka  1.8  105 ) and 0.50
M sodium acetate (NaC2H3O2). Calculate the pH of this solution.
Solution

Major Species
HC2H3O2

The major species in the solution are
HC2H3O2,

Na,

C2H3O2,

Weak
acid

Neither
acid nor
base

Base
(conjugate
base of
HC2H3O2)

h

C2H3O2–

h

Na+
H2O

h

and

H2O
h

Very weak
acid or
base

Examination of the solution components leads to the conclusion that the acetic acid dissociation equilibrium, which involves both HC2H3O2 and C2H3O2, will control the pH of
the solution:
HC2H3O2 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C2H3O2 1aq2
3H 4 3C2H3O2 4
Ka  1.8  105 
3HC2H3O2 4
The concentrations are as follows:

Initial
Concentration (mol/L)

A digital pH meter shows the pH of the
buffered solution to be 4.740.

[HC2H3O2 ] 0  0.50
[C2H3O2 ] 0  0.50
[H ] 0  0

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)
x mol/L of
HC2H3O2
---¡
dissociates
to reach
equilibrium

[HC2H3O2 ]  0.50  x
[C2H3O2 ]  0.50  x
[H ]  x

15.2 Buffered Solutions

685

The corresponding ICE table is

HC2H3O2(aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

∆

H(aq)



0
x
x

0.50
x
0.50  x

C2H3O2(aq)
0.50
x
0.50  x

Then
Ka  1.8  105 

3H 4 3C2H3O2 4
1x210.50  x2
1x210.502


3HC2H3O2 4
0.50  x
0.50
x  1.8  105

and

The approximations are valid (by the 5% rule), so
3H 4  x  1.8  105 M

and

pH  4.74
See Exercises 15.33 and 15.34.

Sample Exercise 15.3

Major Species
HC2H3O2

C2H3O2–
Na+
OH–
H2O

pH Changes in Buffered Solutions
Calculate the change in pH that occurs when 0.010 mol solid NaOH is added to 1.0 L of
the buffered solution described in Sample Exercise 15.2. Compare this pH change with
that which occurs when 0.010 mol solid NaOH is added to 1.0 L of water.
Solution
Since the added solid NaOH will completely dissociate, the major species in solution
before any reaction occurs are HC2H3O2, Na, C2H3O2, OH, and H2O. Note that the
solution contains a relatively large amount of the very strong base hydroxide ion, which
has a great afﬁnity for protons. The best source of protons is the acetic acid, and the
reaction that will occur is
OH  HC2H3O2 ¡ H2O  C2H3O2
Although acetic acid is a weak acid, the hydroxide ion is such a strong base that the
reaction above will proceed essentially to completion (until the OH ions are consumed).
The best approach to this problem involves two distinct steps: (1) assume that the
reaction goes to completion, and carry out the stoichiometric calculations, and then
(2) carry out the equilibrium calculations.
1. The stoichiometry problem. The stoichiometry for the reaction is shown below.

Major Species

HC2H3O2



OH

¡

C2H3O2

HC2H3O2

Before
reaction:

1.0 L  0.50 M
 0.50 mol

0.010 mol

1.0 L  0.50 M
 0.50 mol

C2H3O2–

After
reaction:

0.50  0.010
 0.49 mol

0.010  0.010
 0 mol

0.50  0.010
 0.51 mol



H2O

Na+
H2O

Note that 0.010 mol HC2H3O2 has been converted to 0.010 mol C2H3O2 by the added OH.

686

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
2. The equilibrium problem. After the reaction between OH and HC2H3O2 is complete,
the major species in solution are
Na,

HC2H3O2,

C2H3O2,

and H2O

The dominant equilibrium involves the dissociation of acetic acid.
This problem is then very similar to that in Sample Exercise 15.2. The only difference is that the addition of 0.010 mol OH has consumed some HC2H3O2 and produced
some C2H3O2, yielding the following ICE table:
HC2H3O2(aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

H(aq)

∆

0.49
x
0.49  x



0
x
x

C2H3O2(aq)
0.51
x
0.51  x

Note that the initial concentrations are deﬁned after the reaction with OH is complete
but before the system adjusts to equilibrium. Following the usual procedure gives
Ka  1.8  105 

3H 4 3C2H3O2 4
1x210.51  x2
1x210.512


3HC2H3O2 4
0.49  x
0.49
x  1.7  105

and

The approximations are valid (by the 5% rule), so
3H 4  x  1.7  105

and

pH  4.76

The change in pH produced by the addition of 0.01 mol OH to this buffered solution
is then
4.76
h

(top) Pure water at pH 7.000. (bottom)
When 0.01 mol NaOH is added to 1.0 L of
pure water, the pH jumps to 12.000.



New solution

4.74
h

 0.02

Original solution

The pH increased by 0.02 pH units.
Now compare this with what happens when 0.01 mol solid NaOH is added to 1.0 L
water to give 0.01 M NaOH. In this case [OH]  0.01 M and
Kw
1.0  1014

 1.0  1012
3OH 4
1.0  102
pH  12.00

3 H 4 

Thus the change in pH is
12.00
h

New solution



7.00
h

 5.00

Pure water

The increase is 5.00 pH units. Note how well the buffered solution resists a change in pH
as compared with pure water.
See Exercises 15.35 and 15.36.
Sample Exercises 15.2 and 15.3 represent typical buffer problems that involve all the
concepts that you need to know to handle buffered solutions containing weak acids. Pay
special attention to the following points:
1. Buffered solutions are simply solutions of weak acids or bases containing a common
ion. The pH calculations on buffered solutions require exactly the same procedures
introduced in Chapter 14. This is not a new type of problem.

15.2 Buffered Solutions

687

2. When a strong acid or base is added to a buffered solution, it is best to deal with the
stoichiometry of the resulting reaction ﬁrst. After the stoichiometric calculations
are completed, then consider the equilibrium calculations. This procedure can be presented as follows:

(H+/OH– added)

Original buffered
solution pH

Modified pH

Step 1
Do stoichiometry calculations to
determine new concentrations.
Assume reaction with H+/OH–
goes to completion.

Step 2
Do equilibrium calculations.

Buffering: How Does It Work?
Visualization: Buffers

Sample Exercises 15.2 and 15.3 demonstrate the ability of a buffered solution to absorb
hydroxide ions without a signiﬁcant change in pH. But how does a buffer work? Suppose
a buffered solution contains relatively large quantities of a weak acid HA and its conjugate base A. When hydroxide ions are added to the solution, since the weak acid represents the best source of protons, the following reaction occurs:
OH  HA ¡ A  H2O
The net result is that OH ions are not allowed to accumulate but are replaced by A
ions.

Original
buffer pH

OH– added

Final pH of buffer
close to original

Added OH– ions replaced
by A– ions

The stability of the pH under these conditions can be understood by examining the equilibrium expression for the dissociation of HA:
Ka 
or, rearranging,
In a buffered solution the pH is governed
by the ratio [HA][A].

3H 4 3 A 4
3HA4

3H 4  Ka

3HA4
3A 4

In other words, the equilibrium concentration of H, and thus the pH, is determined by
the ratio [HA][A]. When OH ions are added, HA is converted to A, and the ratio
[HA][A] decreases. However, if the amounts of HA and A originally present are very
large compared with the amount of OH added, the change in the [HA][A] ratio will
be small.

688

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
In Sample Exercises 15.2 and 15.3,
3HA4
0.50
 1.0 Initially
 
3A 4
0.50
3HA4
0.49

 0.96 After adding 0.01 mol/L OH
3A 4
0.51
The change in the ratio [HA][A] is very small. Thus the [H] and the pH remain
essentially constant.
The essence of buffering, then, is that [HA] and [A] are large compared with the
amount of OH added. Thus, when the OH is added, the concentrations of HA and A
change, but only by small amounts. Under these conditions, the [HA][A] ratio and thus
the [H] remain virtually constant.

Original
[HA]

Final
[HA]

OH– added

[A–]
close to
original

[A–]

The OH– added changes
HA to A– , but [HA] and
[A–] are large compared
to the [OH–] added.

Visualization: Adding an Acid
to a Buffer

Similar reasoning applies when protons are added to a buffered solution of a weak
acid and a salt of its conjugate base. Because the A ion has a high afﬁnity for H, the
added H ions react with A to form the weak acid:
H  A ¡ HA
and free H ions do not accumulate. In this case there will be a net change of A to HA.
However, if [A] and [HA] are large compared with the [H] added, little change in the
pH will occur.
The form of the acid dissociation equilibrium expression
3H 4  Ka

3HA4
3A 4

(15.1)

is often useful for calculating [H] in a buffered solution, since [HA] and [A] are known.
For example, to calculate [H] in a buffered solution containing 0.10 M HF (Ka  7.2 
104) and 0.30 M NaF, we simply substitute into Equation (15.1):
[HF]
q

3H 4  17.2  104 2
Ka p

0.10
 2.4  104 M
0.30
r[F]

Another useful form of Equation (15.1) can be obtained by taking the negative log of both
sides:
log 3H 4  log1Ka 2  log a

3HA4
b
3A 4

15.2 Buffered Solutions
pH  pKa  log a

That is,

689

3HA4
b
3A 4

or, where inverting the log term reverses the sign:
pH  pKa  log a

3A 4
3base4
b  pKa  log a
b
3HA4
3acid 4

(15.2)

This log form of the expression for Ka is called the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation
and is useful for calculating the pH of solutions when the ratio [HA][A] is known.
For a particular buffering system (conjugate acid–base pair), all solutions that have
the same ratio [A][HA] will have the same pH. For example, a buffered solution containing 5.0 M HC2H3O2 and 3.0 M NaC2H3O2 will have the same pH as one containing
0.050 M HC2H3O2 and 0.030 M NaC2H3O2. This can be shown as follows:
[A]/[HA]

System
5.0 M HC2H3O2 and
3.0 M NaC2H3O2

3.0 M
 0.60
5.0 M

0.050 M HC2H3O2 and
0.030 M NaC2H3O2

0.030 M
 0.60
0.050 M

Therefore,
pH  pKa  log a

3C2H3O2 4
b  4.74  log10.602  4.74  0.22  4.52
3HC2H3O2 4

Note that in using this equation we have assumed that the equilibrium concentrations
of A and HA are equal to the initial concentrations. That is, we are assuming the validity of the approximations
3A 4  3A 4 0  x  3A 4 0

and

3HA4  3HA4 0  x  3HA4 0

where x is the amount of acid that dissociates. Since the initial concentrations of HA and
A are relatively large in a buffered solution, this assumption is generally acceptable.

Sample Exercise 15.4
Major Species

HC3H5O3

The pH of a Buffered Solution II
Calculate the pH of a solution containing 0.75 M lactic acid (Ka  1.4  104 ) and
0.25 M sodium lactate. Lactic acid (HC3H5O3) is a common constituent of biologic
systems. For example, it is found in milk and is present in human muscle tissue during exertion.
Solution
The major species in solution are

C3H5O3–
Na

+

H2O

HC3H5O3,

Na,

C3H5O3,

and H2O

Since Na has no acid–base properties and H2O is a weak acid or base, the pH will be
controlled by the lactic acid dissociation equilibrium:
HC3H5O3 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C3H5O3 1aq2
Ka 

3H 4 3C3H5O3 4
 1.4  104
3HC3H5O3 4

690

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
Since [HC3H5O3]0 and [C3H5O3 ] 0 are relatively large,

3HC3H5O3 4  3HC3H5O3 4 0  0.75 M
3C3H5O3 4  3C3H5O3 4 0  0.25 M

and

Thus, using the rearranged Ka expression, we have
3H 4  Ka

3HC3H5O3 4
10.75 M2
4
 4.2  104 M
  11.4  10 2
3C3H5O3 4
10.25 M2
pH  log14.2  104 2  3.38

and

Alternatively, we could use the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation:
pH  pKa  log a

3C3H5O3 4
0.25 M
b  3.85  log a
b  3.38
3HC3H5O3 4
0.75 M
See Exercises 15.37 and 15.38.

Buffered solutions also can be formed from a weak base and the corresponding conjugate acid. In these solutions, the weak base B reacts with any H added:
B  H ¡ BH
and the conjugate acid BH reacts with any added OH:
BH  OH ¡ B  H2O
The approach needed to perform pH calculations for these systems is virtually identical
to that used above. This makes sense because, as is true of all buffered solutions, a weak
acid (BH) and a weak base (B) are present. A typical case is illustrated in Sample
Exercise 15.5.
Sample Exercise 15.5

The pH of a Buffered Solution III
A buffered solution contains 0.25 M NH3 (Kb  1.8  105 ) and 0.40 M NH4Cl. Calculate the pH of this solution.

Major Species

Solution
The major species in solution are

NH4+
NH3

NH3,

NH4,

Cl,

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

Cl

–

and H2O

From the dissolved NH4Cl

Since Cl is such a weak base and water is a weak acid or base, the important equilibrium is
NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2

H 2O

Kb  1.8  105 

and

3NH4 4 3OH 4
3NH3 4

The appropriate ICE table is:

NH3(aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

0.25
x
0.25  x



H2O(l)
—
—
—

∆

NH4(aq)
0.40
x
0.40  x



OH(aq)
0
x
x

15.2 Buffered Solutions

691

Then
Kb  1.8  105 

3NH4 4 3OH 4
10.40  x21x2
10.4021x2


3NH3 4
0.25  x
0.25
x  1.1  105

and

The approximations are valid (by the 5% rule), so
3OH 4  x  1.1  105
pOH  4.95
pH  14.00  4.95  9.05
This case is typical of a buffered solution in that the initial and equilibrium concentrations of buffering materials are essentially the same.
Alternative Solution
There is another way of looking at this problem. Since the solution contains relatively
large quantities of both NH4 and NH3, we can use the equilibrium
NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2

to calculate [OH ] and then calculate [H] from Kw as we have just done. Or we can use
the dissociation equilibrium for NH4, that is,
NH4 1aq2 ∆ NH3 1aq2  H 1aq2

to calculate [H] directly. Either choice will give the same answer, since the same equilibrium concentrations of NH3 and NH4 must satisfy both equilibria.
We can obtain the Ka value for NH4 from the given Kb value for NH3, since
Ka  Kb  Kw:
Ka 

Kw
1.0  1014

 5.6  1010
Kb
1.8  105

Then, using the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation, we have
3base4
b
3acid 4
0.25 M
 9.25  log a
b  9.25  0.20  9.05
0.40 M

pH  pKa  log a

See Exercises 15.37 and 15.38.
Sample Exercise 15.6
Major Species

Adding Strong Acid to a Buffered Solution I
Calculate the pH of the solution that results when 0.10 mol gaseous HCl is added to 1.0 L
of the buffered solution from Sample Exercise 15.5.
Solution

Cl–
H+

Before any reaction occurs, the solution contains the following major species:
NH3,

NH4,

Cl,

H,

and

H2O



NH4+
NH3
H 2O

What reaction can occur? We know that H will not react with Cl to form HCl. In contrast to Cl, the NH3 molecule has a great afﬁnity for protons (this is demonstrated by the
fact that NH4 is such a weak acid [ Ka  5.6  1010 ] ). Thus NH3 will react with H to
form NH4:
NH3 1aq2  H 1aq2 ¡ NH4 1aq2

692

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
Since this reaction can be assumed to go essentially to completion to form the very weak
acid NH4, we will do the stoichiometry calculations before we consider the equilibrium calculations. That is, we will let the reaction run to completion and then consider the equilibrium.
The stoichiometry calculations for this process are shown below.

Remember: Think about the chemistry
ﬁrst. Ask yourself if a reaction will occur
among the major species.

Before
reaction:

(1.0 L)(0.25 M)
 0.25 mol

After
reaction:

0.25  0.10
 0.15 mol

0.10 mol
h
Limiting reactant

(1.0 L)(0.40 M)
 0.40 mol
0.40  0.10
 0.50 mol

0

NH3,

NH4,

Cl,

and

H2O

3NH3 4 0 

0.15 mol
 0.15 M
1.0 L
0.50 mol
3NH4 4 0 
 0.50 M
1.0 L

and

NH4+
NH3

NH4

¡

After the reaction goes to completion, the solution contains the major species

Major Species

Cl–

H



NH3

We can use the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation, where
3Base4  3NH3 4  3NH3 4 0  0.15 M
3Acid4  3NH4 4  3NH4 4 0  0.50 M

H 2O

Then
3NH3 4
b
3NH4 4
0.15 M
 9.25  log a
b  9.25  0.52  8.73
0.50 M

pH  pKa  log a

Note that the addition of HCl only slightly decreases the pH, as we would expect in
a buffered solution.
See Exercise 15.39.

Summary of the Most Important Characteristics of Buffered Solutions
䊉

䊉

Buffered solutions contain relatively large concentrations of a weak acid and the corresponding weak base. They can involve a weak acid HA and the conjugate base A
or a weak base B and the conjugate acid BH.
When H is added to a buffered solution, it reacts essentially to completion with the
weak base present:
H  A  ¡ HA

䊉

or H   B ¡ BH

When OH is added to a buffered solution, it reacts essentially to completion with
the weak acid present:
OH   HA ¡ A   H2O

or OH   BH ¡ B  H2O

15.3 Buffering Capacity

䊉

The pH in the buffered solution is determined by the ratio of the concentrations of
the weak acid and weak base. As long as this ratio remains virtually constant, the pH
will remain virtually constant. This will be the case as long as the concentrations of
the buffering materials (HA and A or B and BH) are large compared with the
amounts of H or OH added.

15.3
A buffer with a large capacity contains
large concentrations of the buffering
components.

Sample Exercise 15.7

693

Buffering Capacity

The buffering capacity of a buffered solution represents the amount of protons or hydroxide ions the buffer can absorb without a signiﬁcant change in pH. A buffer with a
large capacity contains large concentrations of buffering components and so can absorb a
relatively large amount of protons or hydroxide ions and show little pH change. The pH
of a buffered solution is determined by the ratio [A][HA]. The capacity of a buffered
solution is determined by the magnitudes of [HA] and [A].

Adding Strong Acid to a Buffered Solution II
Calculate the change in pH that occurs when 0.010 mol gaseous HCl is added to 1.0 L of
each of the following solutions:
Solution A:
Solution B:

5.00 M HC2H3O2 and 5.00 M NaC2H3O2
0.050 M HC2H3O2 and 0.050 M NaC2H3O2

For acetic acid, Ka  1.8  105.
Solution
For both solutions the initial pH can be determined from the Henderson–Hasselbalch
equation:
pH  pKa  log a

3C2H3O2 4
b
3HC2H3O2 4

In each case, [C2H3O2 ]  [HC2H3O2 ]. Therefore, the initial pH for both A and B is
pH  pKa  log112  pKa  log11.8  105 2  4.74

After the addition of HCl to each of these solutions, the major species before any reaction occurs are
HC2H3O2,

Cl

Na,

C2H3O2,

–

H,

Cl,

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

Major Species

and H2O

From the added HCl

HC2H3O2
C2H3O2–

Will any reactions occur among these species? Note that we have a relatively large quantity of H, which will readily react with any effective base. We know that Cl will not
react with H to form HCl in water. However, C2H3O2 will react with H to form the
weak acid HC2H3O2:
H 1aq2  C2H3O2 1aq2 ¡ HC2H3O2 1aq2

+

Na
H+

H2O

Because HC2H3O2 is a weak acid, we assume that this reaction runs to completion; the
0.010 mol of added H will convert 0.010 mol C2H3O2 to 0.010 mol HC2H3O2.
For solution A (since the solution volume is 1.0 L, the number of moles equals the
molarity), the following calculations apply:
H
Before reaction:
After reaction:

0.010 M
0



C2H3O2
5.00 M
4.99 M

¡

HC2H3O2
5.00 M
5.01 M

694

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
The new pH can be obtained by substituting the new concentrations into the Henderson–
Hasselbalch equation:

Original solution

3C2H3O2 4
b
3HC2H3O2 4
4.99
 4.74  log a
b  4.74  0.0017  4.74
5.01

pH  pKa  log a

New solution

[A ]
5.00
    1.00
[HA]
5.00

H
added

[A  ]
4.99
    0.996
[HA]
5.01

There is virtually no change in pH for solution A when 0.010 mol gaseous HCl is added.
For solution B, the following calculations apply:

H
Before reaction:
After reaction:



C2H3O2

0.010 M
0

¡

0.050 M
0.040 M

HC2H3O2
0.050 M
0.060 M

The new pH is
Original solution

New solution

[A ]
0.050
 1.0

  
[HA]
0.050

H
added

pH  4.74  log a

0.040
b
0.060
 4.74  0.18  4.56

[A ]
0.040
  
 0.67
[HA]
0.060

Although the pH change for solution B is small, a change did occur, which is in contrast
to solution A.
These results show that solution A, which contains much larger quantities of buffering components, has a much higher buffering capacity than solution B.
See Exercises 15.39 and 15.40.
Solution A
Original A
[Ac–]
= 1.00
[HAc]

Final A
[Ac–]
= 0.98
[HAc]

H+

2% change

Original A
H+
[H+] =1.8 x 10–5 M
pH = 4.74

Final A
[H+] =1.8 x 10–5 M
pH = 4.74

We have seen that the pH of a buffered solution depends on the ratio of the concentrations of buffering components. When this ratio is least affected by added protons or hydroxide ions, the solution is the most resistant to a change in pH. To ﬁnd the ratio that
gives optimal buffering, let’s suppose we have a buffered solution containing a large
concentration of acetate ion and only a small concentration of acetic acid. Addition of
protons to form acetic acid will produce a relatively large percent change in the concentration of acetic acid and so will produce a relatively large change in the ratio
[C2H3O2 ] [HC2H3O2 ] (see Table 15.1). Similarly, if hydroxide ions are added to remove
some acetic acid, the percent change in the concentration of acetic acid is again large. The
same effects are seen if the initial concentration of acetic acid is large and that of acetate
ion is small.

Solution B
Original B
[Ac–]
= 100
[HAc]

H+

Final B
[Ac–]
= 49.5
[HAc]

50.5% change

TABLE 15.1 Change in [C2H3O2]/[HC2H3O2] for Two Solutions When 0.01 mol
H Is Added to 1.0 L of Each
Solution
A

Original B
H+
[H+] = 1.8 x 10–7 M
pH = 6.74

Final B
[H+] = 3.6 x 10–7 M
pH = 6.44

B

a

[C2H3O2  ]
b
[HC2H3O2] orig

1.00 M
 1.00
1.00 M
1.00 M
100
0.01 M

a

[C2H3O2  ]
b
[HC2H3O2] new

0.99 M
 0.98
1.01 M
0.99 M
 49.5
0.02 M

Change

Percent
Change

1.00 n 0.98

2.00%

100 n 49.5

50.5%

15.3 Buffering Capacity

695

Because large changes in the ratio [A ] [HA] will produce large changes in pH,
we want to avoid this situation for the most effective buffering. This type of reasoning
leads us to the general conclusion that optimal buffering occurs when [HA] is equal to
[A ]. It is for this condition that the ratio [A ] [HA] is most resistant to change when
H or OH is added to the buffered solution. This means that when choosing the buffering components for a speciﬁc application, we want [A ] [HA] to equal 1. It follows
that since
pH  pKa  log a

3A 4
b  pKa  log112  pKa
3HA4

the pKa of the weak acid to be used in the buffer should be as close as possible to the
desired pH. For example, suppose we need a buffered solution with a pH of 4.00. The
most effective buffering will occur when [HA] is equal to [A]. From the Henderson–
Hasselbalch equation,
pH  pKa  log a
h
A
A
4.00 is
wanted

3A 4
b
3HA4
h
A
A
OORatio  1 for most effective buffer

That is, 4.00  pKa  log(1)  pKa  0 and pKa  4.00
Thus the best choice of a weak acid is one that has pKa  4.00 or Ka  1.0  104.

Sample Exercise 15.8

Preparing a Buffer
A chemist needs a solution buffered at pH 4.30 and can choose from the following acids
(and their sodium salts):
a.
b.
c.
d.

chloroacetic acid (Ka  1.35  103 )
propanoic acid (Ka  1.3  105 )
benzoic acid (Ka  6.4  105 )
hypochlorous acid (Ka  3.5  108 )

Calculate the ratio [HA] [A ] required for each system to yield a pH of 4.30. Which
system will work best?
Solution
A pH of 4.30 corresponds to
3H 4  104.30  antilog14.302  5.0  105 M
Since Ka values rather than pKa values are given for the various acids, we use Equation (15.1)
3H 4  Ka

3HA4
3A 4

rather than the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation. We substitute the required [H] and
Ka for each acid into Equation (15.1) to calculate the ratio [HA] [A ] needed in each
case.

696

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

[H]  Ka

Acid

[HA]
[A  ]

[HA]
[A  ]

a. Chloroacetic

5.0  105  1.35  103 a

b. Propanoic

5.0  105  1.3  105 a

c. Benzoic

5.0  105  6.4  105 a

d. Hypochlorous

5.0  105  3.5  108 a

3HA 4
3A 4

3HA 4
3A 4

3HA 4
3A 4

3HA 4
3A 4

b

3.7  102

b

3.8

b

0.78

b

1.4  103

Since [HA] [A ] for benzoic acid is closest to 1, the system of benzoic acid and its
sodium salt will be the best choice among those given for buffering a solution at pH 4.3.
This example demonstrates the principle that the optimal buffering system has a pKa value
close to the desired pH. The pKa for benzoic acid is 4.19.
See Exercises 15.45 and 15.46.

15.4

Titrations and pH Curves

As we saw in Chapter 4, a titration is commonly used to determine the amount of acid or
base in a solution. This process involves a solution of known concentration (the titrant)
delivered from a buret into the unknown solution until the substance being analyzed is
just consumed. The stoichiometric (equivalence) point is often signaled by the color change
of an indicator. In this section we will discuss the pH changes that occur during an
acid–base titration. We will use this information later to show how an appropriate indicator can be chosen for a particular titration.
The progress of an acid–base titration is often monitored by plotting the pH of the
solution being analyzed as a function of the amount of titrant added. Such a plot is called
a pH curve or titration curve.

Strong Acid–Strong Base Titrations
The net ionic reaction for a strong acid–strong base titration is
H 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2
To compute [H] at a given point in the titration, we must determine the amount
of H that remains at that point and divide by the total volume of the solution.
Before we proceed, we need to consider a new unit, which is especially convenient
for titrations. Since titrations usually involve small quantities (burets are typically
graduated in milliliters), the mole is inconveniently large. Therefore, we will use
the millimole (abbreviated mmol), which, as the preﬁx indicates, is a thousandth of a
mole:
A setup used to do the pH titration of an
acid or a base.

1 mmol 

1 mol
 103 mol
1000

15.4 Titrations and pH Curves

697

So far we have deﬁned molarity only in terms of moles per liter. We can now deﬁne it in
terms of millimoles per milliliter, as shown below:
1 millimole  1  103 mol
1 mL  1  103 L

mol solute
mol solute
1000
mmol solute
Molarity 


L solution
L solution
mL solution
1000

mmol
mol

M
mL
L

A 1.0 M solution thus contains 1.0 mole of solute per liter of solution or, equivalently,
1.0 millimole of solute per milliliter of solution. Just as we obtain the number of moles
of solute from the product of the volume in liters and the molarity, we obtain the number
of millimoles of solute from the product of the volume in milliliters and the molarity:
Number of mmol  volume 1in mL2  molarity

CASE STUDY: Strong Acid–Strong Base Titration

pH

13.0

We will illustrate the calculations involved in a strong acid–strong base titration by considering the titration of 50.0 mL of 0.200 M HNO3 with 0.100 M NaOH. We will calculate
the pH of the solution at selected points during the course of the titration, where speciﬁc
volumes of 0.100 M NaOH have been added.

7.0

A. No NaOH has been added.
Since HNO3 is a strong acid (is completely dissociated), the solution contains the major
species

A

H ,

0
0

50.0 100.0 150.0
Vol NaOH added (mL)

200.0

NO3,

and H2O

and the pH is determined by the H from the nitric acid. Since 0.200 M HNO3 contains
0.200 M H,
3H 4  0.200 M

and pH  0.699

B. 10.0 mL of 0.100 M NaOH has been added.
In the mixed solution before any reaction occurs, the major species are
H,

pH

13.0

NO3,

Na,

OH,

and H2O

Note that large quantities of both H and OH are present. The 1.00 mmol (10.0 mL 
0.100 M) of added OH will react with 1.00 mmol H to form water:

7.0

H

AB
0
0

50.0 100.0 150.0
Vol NaOH added (mL)

200.0

OH



¡

Before
reaction:

50.0 mL  0.200 M
 10.0 mmol

10.0 mL  0.100 M
 1.00 mmol

After
reaction:

10.0  1.00
 9.0 mmol

1.00  1.00
0

After the reaction, the solution contains
H,

NO3,

Na,

and

H2O (the OH ions have been consumed)

and the pH will be determined by the H remaining:
The ﬁnal solution volume is the sum of
the original volume of HNO3 and the volume of added NaOH.

3H 4 

mmol H left
9.0 mmol

 0.15 M
volume of solution 1mL2
150.0  10.02 mL
p

Original volume of
HNO3 solution

pH  log10.152  0.82

r

Volume of
NaOH added

H2O

698

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
C. 20.0 mL (total) of 0.100 M NaOH has been added.
We consider this point from the perspective that a total of 20.0 mL NaOH has been added
to the original solution, rather than that 10.0 mL has been added to the solution from point
B. It is best to go back to the original solution each time so that a mistake made at an
earlier point does not show up in each succeeding calculation. As before, the added OH
will react with H to form water:

H

pH

13.0

7.0

ABC

D



Before
reaction:

50.0 mL  0.200 M
10.0 mmol

20.0 mL  0.100 M
 2.00 mmol

After
reaction:

10.0  2.00
 8.00 mmol

2.00  2.00
 0 mmol

¡

H2O

After the reaction

0
0

OH

50.0 100.0 150.0
Vol NaOH added (mL)

(H remaining)

200.0

3H 4 

8.00 mmol
 0.11 M
150.0  20.02 mL
pH  0.942

D. 50.0 mL (total) of 0.100 M NaOH has been added.
Proceeding exactly as for points B and C, the pH is found to be 1.301.
Equivalence (stoichiometric) point: The
point in the titration where an amount of
base has been added to exactly react
with all the acid originally present.

E. 100.0 mL (total) of 0.100 M NaOH has been added.
At this point the amount of NaOH that has been added is
100.0 mL  0.100 M  10.0 mmol
The original amount of nitric acid was

pH

13.0

50.0 mL  0.200 M  10.0 mmol
Enough OH has been added to react exactly with the H from the nitric acid. This is the
stoichiometric point, or equivalence point, of the titration. At this point the major species
in solution are

E

7.0

Na,
ABC

D

0
0

50.0 100.0 150.0
Vol NaOH added (mL)

Since Na has no acid or base properties and NO3 is the anion of the strong acid HNO3
and is therefore a very weak base, neither NO3 nor Na affects the pH, and the solution
is neutral (the pH is 7.00).

H

E

7.0

ABC

D

0
0

50.0 100.0 150.0
Vol NaOH added (mL)

and H2O

F. 150.0 mL (total) of 0.100 M NaOH has been added.
The stoichiometric calculations for the titration reaction are as follows:

F

13.0

pH

200.0

NO3,

200.0



OH

Before
reaction:

50.0 mL  0.200 M
 10.0 mmol

150.0 mL  0.100 M
 15.0 mmol

After
reaction:

10.0  10.0
 0 mmol

15.0  10.0
 5.0 mmol
c
Excess OH added

¡

H2O

15.4 Titrations and pH Curves

699

Now OH is in excess and will determine the pH:
3 OH 4 

mmol OH in excess
5.0 mmol
5.0 mmol


 0.025 M
volume 1mL2
150.0  150.02 mL
200.0 mL

Since [H][OH]  1.0  1014,
3H 4 

F

E

7.0

ABC

D

0
50.0 100.0 150.0
Vol NaOH added (mL)

pH  12.40

Before the equivalence point, [H] (and hence the pH) can be calculated by dividing the number of millimoles of H remaining by the total volume of the solution in
millimeters.

200.0

At the equivalence point, the pH is 7.00.
After the equivalence point, [OH] can be calculated by dividing the number of millimoles of excess OH by the total volume of the solution. Then [H] is obtained
from Kw.
The titration of a strong base with a strong acid requires reasoning very similar to
that used above, except, of course, that OH is in excess before the equivalence point and
H is in excess after the equivalence point. The pH curve for the titration of 100.0 mL of
0.50 M NaOH with 1.0 M HCl is shown in Fig. 15.2.

13.0

14.0

Equivalence
point

7.0

Equivalence
point
pH

0

and

G. 200.0 mL (total) of 0.100 M NaOH has been added.
Proceeding as for point F, the pH is found to be 12.60.
The results of these calculations are summarized by the pH curve shown in Fig. 15.1.
Note that the pH changes very gradually until the titration is close to the equivalence point,
where a dramatic change occurs. This behavior is due to the fact that early in the titration
there is a relatively large amount of H in the solution, and the addition of a given amount
of OH thus produces a small change in pH. However, near the equivalence point [H]
is relatively small, and the addition of a small amount of OH produces a large change.
The pH curve in Fig. 15.1, typical of the titration of a strong acid with a strong base,
has the following characteristics:

pH

pH

13.0

G

1.0  1014
 4.0  1013 M
2.5  102

7.0

0
0

50.0 100.0 150.0
Vol NaOH added (mL)

200.0

FIGURE 15.1
The pH curve for the titration of 50.0 mL of
0.200 M HNO3 with 0.100 M NaOH. Note
that the equivalence point occurs at 100.0
mL of NaOH added, the point where exactly enough OH has been added to react
with all the H originally present. The pH
of 7 at the equivalence point is characteristic of a strong acid–strong base titration.

50.00 mL
Vol 1.0 M HCl added

FIGURE 15.2
The pH curve for the titration of 100.0 mL of
0.50 M NaOH with 1.0 M HCl. The equivalence
point occurs at 50.00 mL of HCl added, since at
this point 5.0 mmol H has been added to react with the original 5.0 mmol OH.

700

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

Titrations of Weak Acids with Strong Bases

OH– added

pH

Stoichiometry
calculation

New pH

Equilibrium
calculation

Treat the stoichiometry and equilibrium
problems separately.

We have seen that since strong acids and strong bases are completely dissociated, the calculations to obtain the pH curves for titrations involving the two are quite straightforward.
However, when the acid being titrated is a weak acid, there is a major difference: To calculate [H] after a certain amount of strong base has been added, we must deal with the
weak acid dissociation equilibrium. We have dealt with this same situation earlier in this
chapter when we treated buffered solutions. Calculation of the pH curve for a titration of
a weak acid with a strong base really amounts to a series of buffer problems. In performing
these calculations it is very important to remember that even though the acid is weak, it
reacts essentially to completion with hydroxide ion, a very strong base.
Calculating the pH curve for a weak acid–strong base titration involves a two-step
procedure.

➥1
➥2

A stoichiometry problem. The reaction of hydroxide ion with the weak acid is assumed to run to completion, and the concentrations of the acid remaining and
the conjugate base formed are determined.
An equilibrium problem. The position of the weak acid equilibrium is determined, and the pH is calculated.

It is essential to do these steps separately. Note that the procedures necessary to do
these calculations have all been used before.

CASE STUDY: Weak Acid–Strong Base Titration
As an illustration, we will consider the titration of 50.0 mL of 0.10 M acetic acid (HC2H3O2,
Ka  1.8  105) with 0.10 M NaOH. As before, we will calculate the pH at various
points representing volumes of added NaOH.
A. No NaOH has been added.
This is a typical weak acid calculation of the type introduced in Chapter 14. The pH is
2.87. (Check this yourself.)
B. 10.0 mL of 0.10 M NaOH has been added.
The major species in the mixed solution before any reaction takes place are
HC2H3O2,

OH,

Na,

and

H2O

The strong base OH will react with the strongest proton donor, which in this case is
HC2H3O2.
The Stoichiometry Problem
OH

You are again doing exactly the same
type of calculation already considered in
Chapter 14.



HC2H3O2

Before
reaction:

10 mL  0.10 M
 1.0 mmol

50.0 mL  0.10 M
 5.0 mmol

After
reaction:

1.0  1.0
 0 mmol
c
Limiting reactant

5.0  1.0
 4.0 mmol

C2H3O2

¡



H2O

0 mmol
1.0 mmol
c
Formed by
the reaction

The Equilibrium Problem
We examine the major components left in the solution after the reaction takes place to
decide on the dominant equilibrium. The major species are
HC2H3O2,

C2H3O2,

Na,

and H2O

701

15.4 Titrations and pH Curves

Since HC2H3O2 is a much stronger acid than H2O, and since C2H3O2 is the conjugate
base of HC2H3O2, the pH will be determined by the position of the acetic acid dissociation equilibrium:
HC2H3O2 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C2H3O2 1aq2
Ka 

where

3H 4 3C2H3O2 4
3HC2H3O2 4

We follow the usual steps to complete the equilibrium calculations:

Initial
Concentration

The initial concentrations are deﬁned
after the reaction with OH has gone to
completion but before any dissociation of
HC2H3O2 occurs.

Equilibrium
Concentration

3HC2H3O2 4 0 

4.0 mmol
4.0

150.0  10.02 mL
60.0
1.0
1.0 mmol
3C2H3O2 4 0 

150.0  10.02 mL
60.0
3H  4 0  0

3HC2H3O2 4 

4.0
x
60.0
1.0
x
3 C2H3O2 4 
60.0
3 H 4  x

x mmol/mL
HC2H3O2
---¡
dissociates

The appropriate ICE table is
HC2H3O2 1aq2
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

H  1aq2

∆

4.0
60.0
x
4.0
x
60.0



C2H3O2 1aq2
1.0
60.0
x
1.0
x
60.0

0
x
x

Therefore,

1.8  105  Ka 
xa

Note that the approximations made are
well within the 5% rule.

3H 4 3C2H3O2 4

3HC2H3O2 4




1.0
1.0
 xb
xa
b
60.0
60.0
1.0

 a bx
4.0
4.0
4.0
x
60.0
60.0

xa

4.0
b 11.8  105 2  7.2  105  3H 4
1.0

and pH  4.14

C. 25.0 mL (total) of 0.10 M NaOH has been added.
The procedure here is very similar to that used at point B and will only be summarized
brieﬂy. The stoichiometry problem is summarized as follows:

OH



HC2H3O2

¡

C2H3O2

Before
reaction:

25.0 mL  0.10 M
 2.5 mmol

50.0 mL  0.10 M
 5.0 mmol

0 mmol

After
reaction:

2.5  2.5  0

5.0  2.5
 2.5 mmol

2.5 mmol



H2O

702

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
After the reaction, the major species in solution are
HC2H3O2,

Na,

C2H3O2,

and H2O

The equilibrium that will control the pH is
HC2H3O2 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  C2H3O2 1aq2
and the pertinent concentrations are as follows:
Initial
Concentration

Equilibrium
Concentration

3HC2H3O2 4 0 

2.5 mmol
150.0  25.02 mL
2.5 mmol
3C2H3O2 4 0 
150.0  25.02 mL
3H 4 0  0

3HC2H3O2 4 

2.5
x
75.0
2.5
x
3 C2H3O2 4 
75.0

3H 4  x

x mmol/mL
HC2H3O2
---¡
dissociates

The corresponding ICE table is
HC2H3O2 1aq2

H 1aq2

∆

2.5
75.0
x
2.5
x
75.0

Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:



0
x
x

C2H3O2 1aq2
2.5
75.0
x
2.5
x
75.0

Therefore,
2.5
2.5
 xb
xa
b
3H 4 3C2H3O2 4
75.0
75.0
5
1.8  10  Ka 


3HC2H3O2 4
2.5
2.5
x
75.0
75.0
5

x  1.8  10  3H 4 and pH  4.74




xa

This is a special point in the titration because it is halfway to the equivalence point. The
original solution, 50.0 mL of 0.10 M HC2H3O2, contained 5.0 mmol HC2H3O2. Thus 5.0 mmol
OH is required to reach the equivalence point. That is, 50 mL NaOH is required, since
150.0 mL210.10 M2  5.0 mmol
After 25.0 mL NaOH has been added, half the original HC2H3O2 has been converted to
C2H3O2. At this point in the titration [HC2H3O2]0 is equal to [C2H3O2]0. We can neglect
the effect of dissociation; that is,

[HC2H3O2]  [C2H3O2]

3HC2H3O2 4  3HC2H3O2 4 0  x  3HC2H3O2 4 0
3C2H3O2  4  3C2H3O2 4 0  x  3C2H3O2 4 0
The expression for Ka at the halfway point is
Ka 

3H 4 3 C2H3O2 4
3HC2H3O2 4



3H 4 3C2H3O2 4 0
 3H 4
3HC2H3O2 4 0
88
8n

At this point, half the acid has been used
up, so

Equal at the
halfway point

703

15.4 Titrations and pH Curves
Then, at the halfway point in the titration,
3H 4  Ka and

pH  pKa

D. 40.0 mL (total) of 0.10 M NaOH has been added.
The procedures required here are the same as those used for points B and C. The pH is
5.35. (Check this yourself.)
E. 50.0 mL (total) of 0.10 M NaOH has been added.
This is the equivalence point of the titration; 5.0 mmol OH has been added, which will
just react with the 5.0 mmol HC2H3O2 originally present. At this point the solution contains the major species
Na,

C2H3O2,

and H2O



Note that the solution contains C2H3O2 , which is a base. Remember that a base wants
to combine with a proton, and the only source of protons in this solution is water. Thus
the reaction will be
C2H3O2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ HC2H3O2 1aq2  OH 1aq2
This is a weak base reaction characterized by Kb:
Kb 

3HC2H3O2 4 3OH 4
Kw
1.0  1014


 5.6  1010
3C2H3O2 4
Ka
1.8  105

The relevant concentrations are as follows:
Initial Concentration
(before any C2H3O2 reacts
with H2O)

Equilibrium
Concentration

3C2H3O2 4 0 

5.0 mmol
150.0  50.02 mL
 0.050 M
3OH 4 0  0
3HC2H3O2 4 0  0

x mmol/mL
C2H3O2 reacts
-----¡
with H2O

3 C2H3O2 4  0.050  x
3OH 4  x
3HC2H3O2 4  x

The corresponding ICE table is
C2H3O2 1aq2
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:



0.050
x
0.050  x

H2O1l2

∆

HC2H3O2 1aq2

—
—
—



0
x
x

Therefore,
5.6  1010  Kb 

3HC2H3O2 4 3 OH 4
1x21x2
x2


3C2H3O2 4
0.050  x
0.050
6
x  5.3  10

The approximation is valid (by the 5% rule), so
3OH 4  5.3  106 M

and

3 H 4 3 OH 4  Kw  1.0  1014
3H 4  1.9  109 M
pH  8.72

OH 1aq2
0
x
x

704

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

The pH at the equivalence point of a
titration of a weak acid with a strong
base is always greater than 7.

This is another important result: The pH at the equivalence point of a titration of a
weak acid with a strong base is always greater than 7. This is so because the anion of
the acid, which remains in solution at the equivalence point, is a base. In contrast, for the
titration of a strong acid with a strong base, the pH at the equivalence point is 7.0, because the anion remaining in this case is not an effective base.
F. 60.0 mL (total) of 0.10 M NaOH has been added.
At this point, excess OH has been added. The stoichiometric calculations are as follows:
OH



HC2H3O2

¡

C2H3O2

Before
reaction:

60.0 mL  0.10 M
 6.0 mmol

50.0 mL  0.10 M
 5.0 mmol

0 mmol

After
reaction:

6.0  5.0
 1.0 mmol in excess

5.0  5.0  0

5.0 mmol



H2O

After the reaction is complete, the solution contains the major species
Na,

C2H3O2,

OH,


and

H2O

C2H3O2.


There are two bases in this solution, OH and
However, C2H3O2 is a weak

base compared with OH . Therefore, the amount of OH produced by reaction of C2H3O2
with H2O will be small compared with the excess OH already in solution. You can verify this conclusion by looking at point E, where only 5.3  106 M OH was produced
by C2H3O2. The amount in this case will be even smaller, since the excess OH will push
the Kb equilibrium to the left.
Thus the pH is determined by the excess OH:
mmol of OH in excess
1.0 mmol

volume 1in mL2
150.0  60.02 mL
 9.1  103 M

3OH 4 

1.0  1014
 1.1  1012 M
9.1  103
pH  11.96

3H 4 

and

G. 75.0 mL (total) of 0.10 M NaOH has been added.
The procedure needed here is very similar to that for point F. The pH is 12.30. (Check
this yourself.)
The pH curve for this titration is shown in Fig. 15.3. It is important to note the differences between this curve and that in Fig. 15.1. For example, the shapes of the plots are

12.0
Equivalence
point
9.0
pH

FIGURE 15.3
The pH curve for the titration of 50.0 mL
of 0.100 M HC2H3O2 with 0.100 M NaOH.
Note that the equivalence point occurs
at 50.0 mL of NaOH added, where the
amount of added OH exactly equals the
original amount of acid. The pH at the
equivalence point is greater than 7.0 because the C2H3O2 ion present at this point
is a base and reacts with water to produce
OH.

3.0

25.0
50.0
Vol NaOH added (mL)

705

15.4 Titrations and pH Curves

pH

Weak acid

Strong acid

Vol NaOH

The equivalence point is deﬁned by the
stoichiometry, not by the pH.

Sample Exercise 15.9

quite different before the equivalence point, although they are very similar after that point.
(The shapes of the strong and weak acid curves are the same after the equivalence points
because excess OH controls the pH in this region in both cases.) Near the beginning of
the titration of the weak acid, the pH increases more rapidly than it does in the strong
acid case. It levels off near the halfway point and then increases rapidly again. The leveling off near the halfway point is caused by buffering effects. Earlier in this chapter we
saw that optimal buffering occurs when [HA] is equal to [A]. This is exactly the case at
the halfway point of the titration. As we can see from the curve, the pH changes least
rapidly in this region of the titration.
The other notable difference between the curves for strong and weak acids is the value
of the pH at the equivalence point. For the titration of a strong acid, the equivalence point
occurs at pH 7. For the titration of a weak acid, the pH at the equivalence point is greater
than 7 because of the basicity of the conjugate base of the weak acid.
It is important to understand that the equivalence point in an acid–base titration is
deﬁned by the stoichiometry, not by the pH. The equivalence point occurs when enough
titrant has been added to react exactly with all the acid or base being titrated.

Titration of a Weak Acid
Hydrogen cyanide gas (HCN), a powerful respiratory inhibitor, is highly toxic. It is a very
weak acid (Ka  6.2  1010 ) when dissolved in water. If a 50.0-mL sample of 0.100 M
HCN is titrated with 0.100 M NaOH, calculate the pH of the solution
a. after 8.00 mL of 0.100 M NaOH has been added.
b. at the halfway point of the titration.
c. at the equivalence point of the titration.
Solution
a. The stoichiometry problem. After 8.00 mL of 0.100 M NaOH has been added, the following calculations apply:
OH



HCN

¡

CN



Before
reaction:

50.0 mL  0.100 M
 5.00 mmol

8.00 mL  0.100 M
 0.800 mmol

0 mmol

After
reaction:

5.00  0.800
 4.20 mmol

0.800  0.800  0

0.800 mmol

H2O

The equilibrium problem. Since the solution contains the major species
HCN, CN,

Na,

and H2O

the position of the acid dissociation equilibrium
HCN1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  CN 1aq2
will determine the pH.
Initial Concentration
3HCN 4 0 

4.2 mmol
150.0  8.02 mL
0.800 mmol
3CN 4 0 
150.0  8.02 mL
3H  4 0  0

Equilibrium Concentration
x mmol/mL
--HCN
-¡
dissociates

3HCN 4 

4.2
x
58.0
0.80
x
3CN 4 
58.0

3H 4  x

706

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
The corresponding ICE table is

HCN1aq2

H 1aq2

∆

4.2
58.0
x
4.2
x
58.0

Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:



CN 1aq2
0.80
58.0
x
0.80
x
58.0

0
x
x

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the expression for Ka gives
0.80
0.80
 xb
xa
b
58.0
58.0
0.80

 xa
b
4.2
4.2
4.2
x
a
b
58.0
58.0
x  3.3  109 M  3H 4 and pH  8.49

3H 4 3CN 4
6.2  1010  Ka 

3HCN4

The approximations made here are well
within the 5% rule.

xa

b. At the halfway point of the titration. The amount of HCN originally present can be obtained from the original volume and molarity:
50.0 mL  0.100 M  5.00 mmol
Thus the halfway point will occur when 2.50 mmol OH has been added:
Volume of NaOH 1in mL2  0.100 M  2.50 mmol OH
Volume of NaOH  25.0 mL

or

As was pointed out previously, at the halfway point [HCN] is equal to [CN] and pH
is equal to pKa. Thus, after 25.0 mL of 0.100 M NaOH has been added,
pH  pKa  log16.2  1010 2  9.21

c. At the equivalence point. The equivalence point will occur when a total of 5.00 mmol
OH has been added. Since the NaOH solution is 0.100 M, the equivalence point occurs when 50.0 mL NaOH has been added. This amount will form 5.00 mmol CN.
The major species in solution at the equivalence point are
CN,

Na,

and

H2O

Thus the reaction that will control the pH involves the basic cyanide ion extracting a proton from water:
CN 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ HCN1aq2  OH 1aq2

Kb 

and

3HCN4 3OH 4
Kw
1.0  1014
5


1.6

10

Ka
3CN 4
6.2  1010

Initial Concentration
3CN 4 0 

5.00 mmol
150.0  50.02 mL
 5.00  102 M
3HCN 4 0  0
3 OH 4 0  0

Equilibrium Concentration

x mmol/mL of

reacts
-CN
---¡
with H2O

3 CN 4  15.00  102 2  x
3 HCN4  x
3 OH 4  x

15.4 Titrations and pH Curves

707

The corresponding ICE table is
CN 1aq2
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

0.050
x
0.050  x



H2O1l2

∆

—
—
—

HCN1aq2
0
x
x



OH 1aq2
0
x
x

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the expression for Kb and solving in the
usual way gives
3 OH 4  x  8.9  104
Then, from Kw, we have

3H 4  1.1  1011 and pH  10.96
See Exercises 15.55, 15.57, and 15.58.

The amount of acid present, not its
strength, determines the equivalence
point.

12.0
Ka = 10–10

10.0

Ka = 10–8
pH

8.0
Ka = 10–6
6.0
Ka = 10–4
4.0
Ka = 10–2
2.0
Strong acid
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Vol 0.10 M NaOH added (mL)

FIGURE 15.4
The pH curves for the titrations of 50.0-mL
samples of 0.10 M acids with various Ka
values with 0.10 M NaOH.

Two important conclusions can be drawn from a comparison of the titration
of 50.0 mL of 0.1 M acetic acid covered earlier in this section and that of 50.0 mL of
0.1 M hydrocyanic acid analyzed in Sample Exercise 15.9. First, the same amount of
0.1 M NaOH is required to reach the equivalence point in both cases. The fact that
HCN is a much weaker acid than HC2H3O2 has no bearing on the amount of base required. It is the amount of acid, not its strength, that determines the equivalence point.
Second, the pH value at the equivalence point is affected by the acid strength. For the
titration of acetic acid, the pH at the equivalence point is 8.72; for the titration of
hydrocyanic acid, the pH at the equivalence point is 10.96. This difference occurs
because the CN ion is a much stronger base than the C2H3O2 ion. Also, the pH at
the halfway point of the titration is much higher for HCN than for HC2H3O2, again
because of the greater base strength of the CN ion (or equivalently, the smaller acid
strength of HCN).
The strength of a weak acid has a signiﬁcant effect on the shape of its pH curve. Figure 15.4 shows pH curves for 50-mL samples of 0.10 M solutions of various acids titrated
with 0.10 M NaOH. Note that the equivalence point occurs in each case when the same
volume of 0.10 M NaOH has been added but that the shapes of the curves are dramatically different. The weaker the acid, the greater the pH value at the equivalence point. In
particular, note that the vertical region that surrounds the equivalence point becomes shorter
as the acid being titrated becomes weaker. We will see in the next section that the choice
of an indicator is more limited for such a titration.
Besides being used to analyze for the amount of acid or base in a solution, titrations
can be used to determine the values of equilibrium constants, as shown in Sample Exercise 15.10.

Calculation of Ka
Sample Exercise 15.10

Calculating Ka
A chemist has synthesized a monoprotic weak acid and wants to determine its Ka value.
To do so, the chemist dissolves 2.00 mmol of the solid acid in 100.0 mL water and titrates
the resulting solution with 0.0500 M NaOH. After 20.0 mL NaOH has been added, the
pH is 6.00. What is the Ka value for the acid?

708

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
Solution
The stoichiometry problem. We represent the monoprotic acid as HA. The stoichiometry
for the titration reaction is shown below.

2.00 mmol HA
앗 add OH
1.00 mmol HA
1.00 mmol A



OH



HA
Before
reaction:

2.00 mmol

After
reaction:

2.00  1.00
 1.00 mmol

A

¡



20.0 mL  0.0500 M
 1.00 mmol

0 mmol

1.00  1.00  0

1.00 mmol

H2O

The equilibrium problem. After the reaction the solution contains the major species
HA,

A,

Na,

and

H2O

The pH will be determined by the equilibrium
HA1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  A 1aq2
Ka 

for which

3H 4 3 A 4
3HA4

Initial Concentration

Equilibrium Concentration

3HA4 0 

1.00 mmol
1100.0  20.02 mL
 8.33  103 M

3 HA4  8.33  103  x
HA
-x-mmol/mL
-----¡
dissociates

3A 4 

3A 4  8.33  103  x

3H 4 0  0

3H 4  x

1.00 mmol
1100.0  20.02 mL
 8.33  103 M

The corresponding ICE table is
HA(aq)
Initial:
Change:
Equilibrium:

∆

8.33  103
x
8.33  103  x

H(aq)



0
x
x

A(aq)
8.33  103
x
8.33  103  x

Note that x is known here because the pH at this point is known to be 6.00. Thus
x  3H  4  antilog1pH2  1.0  106 M
Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the expression for Ka allows calculation
of the Ka value:
Ka 


3H 4 3A 4
x 18.33  103  x2

3HA4
18.33  103 2  x
6
11.0  10 218.33  103  1.0  106 2

18.33  103 2  11.0  106 2
11.0  106 218.33  103 2

 1.0  106
8.33  10 3

15.4 Titrations and pH Curves

709

There is an easier way to think about this problem. The original solution contained 2.00
mmol of HA, and since 20.0 mL of added 0.0500 M NaOH contains 1.0 mmol OH, this
is the halfway point in the titration (where [HA] is equal to [A]). Thus
3H 4  Ka  1.0  106
See Exercise 15.63.

Titrations of Weak Bases with Strong Acids
Titrations of weak bases with strong acids can be treated using the procedures we introduced previously. As always, you should think ﬁrst about the major species in solution
and decide whether a reaction occurs that runs essentially to completion. If such a reaction does occur, let it run to completion and do the stoichiometric calculations. Finally,
choose the dominant equilibrium and calculate the pH.

CASE STUDY: Weak Base–Strong Acid Titration
The calculations involved for the titration of a weak base with a strong acid will be illustrated by the titration of 100.0 mL of 0.050 M NH3 with 0.10 M HCl.
Before the addition of any HCl.
1. Major species:
NH3 and

H2O

NH3 is a base and will seek a source of protons. In this case H2O is the only available source.
2. No reactions occur that go to completion, since NH3 cannot readily take a proton from
H2O. This is evidenced by the small Kb value for NH3.
3. The equilibrium that controls the pH involves the reaction of ammonia with water:
NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2
Use Kb to calculate [OH]. Although NH3 is a weak base (compared with OH), it
produces much more OH in this reaction than is produced from the autoionization
of H2O.
Before the equivalence point.
1. Major species (before any reaction occurs):
H,

Cl,

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

NH3,

and H2O

From added
HCl

2. The NH3 will react with H from the added HCl:

NH3 1aq2  H 1aq2 ∆ NH4 1aq2

This reaction proceeds essentially to completion because the NH3 readily reacts with
a free proton. This case is much different from the previous case, where H2O was the
only source of protons. The stoichiometric calculations are then carried out using the
known volume of 0.10 M HCl added.
3. After the reaction of NH3 with H is run to completion, the solution contains the following major species:
NH3,

NH4,
h

Cl,

Formed in
titration reaction

and

H2O

710

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
Note that the solution contains NH3 and NH4, and the equilibria involving these
species will determine [H]. You can use either the dissociation reaction of NH4
NH4 1aq2 ∆ NH3 1aq2  H 1aq2

or the reaction of NH3 with H2O

NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2

At the equivalence point.
1. By deﬁnition, the equivalence point occurs when all the original NH3 is converted to
NH4. Thus the major species in solution are
NH4,

Cl,

and

H2O

2. No reactions occur that go to completion.
3. The dominant equilibrium (the one that controls the [H]) will be the dissociation of
the weak acid NH4, for which
Ka 

Kw
Kb 1for NH3 2

Beyond the equivalence point.
1. Excess HCl has been added, and the major species are
H ,

NH4,

Cl,

and H2O

2. No reaction occurs that goes to completion.
3. Although NH4 will dissociate, it is such a weak acid that [H] will be determined
simply by the excess H:
3H 4 

mmol H  in excess
mL solution

The results of these calculations are shown in Table 15.2. The pH curve is shown in
Fig. 15.5.

TABLE 15.2
0.10 M HCl
Volume of
0.10 M HCl
Added (mL)

Summary of Results for the Titration of 100.0 mL 0.050 M NH3 with

[H]

[NH3]0

[NH4]0

0

0.05 M

0

1.1  1011 M

10.96

10.0

4.0 mmol
1100  102 mL

1.0 mmol
1100  102 mL

1.4  1010 M

9.85

25.0*

2.5 mmol
1100  252 mL

2.5 mmol
1100  252 mL

5.6  1010 M

9.25

50.0†

0

5.0 mmol
1100  502 mL

4.3  106 M

5.36

60.0‡

0

5.0 mmol
1100  602 mL

1.0 mmol
160 mL
 6.2  103 M

*Halfway point
†Equivalence point
‡[H] determined by the 1.0 mmol of excess H

pH

2.21

15.5 Acid–Base Indicators

711

12

pH

10
8

Equivalence
point

6

FIGURE 15.5
The pH curve for the titration of 100.0 mL
of 0.050 M NH3 with 0.10 M HCl. Note the
pH at the equivalence point is less than 7,
since the solution contains the weak acid
NH4.

OH

HO

4
2
0

15.5

10

20

30 40 50 60 70
Vol 0.10 M HCl (mL)

Acid–Base Indicators

There are two common methods for determining the equivalence point of an acid–base
titration:
C

C

OH

1. Use a pH meter (see Fig. 14.9) to monitor the pH and then plot the titration curve. The
center of the vertical region of the pH curve indicates the equivalence point (for
example, see Figs. 15.1 through 15.5).

O–

2. Use an acid–base indicator, which marks the end point of a titration by changing color.
Although the equivalence point of a titration, deﬁned by the stoichiometry, is not
necessarily the same as the end point (where the indicator changes color), careful
selection of the indicator will ensure that the error is negligible.

O
(Colorless acid form, HIn)
–O

O

C

C

O–

O
(Pink base form, In– )

FIGURE 15.6
The acid and base forms of the indicator
phenolphthalein. In the acid form (Hln),
the molecule is colorless. When a proton
(plus H2O) is removed to give the base
form (ln), the color changes to pink.

The indicator phenolphthalein is colorless in
acidic solution and pink in basic solution.

The most common acid–base indicators are complex molecules that are themselves
weak acids (represented by HIn). They exhibit one color when the proton is attached to the
molecule and a different color when the proton is absent. For example, phenolphthalein,
a commonly used indicator, is colorless in its HIn form and pink in its In, or basic, form.
The actual structures of the two forms of phenolphthalein are shown in Fig. 15.6.
To see how molecules such as phenolphthalein function as indicators, consider the following equilibrium for some hypothetical indicator HIn, a weak acid with Ka  1.0  108.

712

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
HIn1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  In 1aq2
Red

By rearranging, we get

3H 4 3 In 4
Ka 
3HIn4

Blue

3In 4
Ka

3H 4
3HIn4

Suppose we add a few drops of this indicator to an acidic solution whose pH is 1.0
([H]  1.0  101). Then
3In 4
Ka
1.0  108
1
7


10


3H 4
10,000,000
3HIn4
1.0  101

The end point is deﬁned by the change in
color of the indicator. The equivalence point
is deﬁned by the reaction stoichiometry.

This ratio shows that the predominant form of the indicator is HIn, resulting in a red solution. As OH is added to this solution in a titration, [H] decreases and the equilibrium
shifts to the right, changing HIn to In. At some point in a titration, enough of the In
form will be present in the solution so that a purple tint will be noticeable. That is, a color
change from red to reddish purple will occur.
How much In must be present for the human eye to detect that the color is different
from the original one? For most indicators, about a tenth of the initial form must be converted to the other form before a new color is apparent. We will assume, then, that in the
titration of an acid with a base, the color change will occur at a pH where
3In 4
1

3HIn4
10

Sample Exercise 15.11

Indicator Color Change
Bromthymol blue, an indicator with a Ka value of 1.0  107, is yellow in its HIn form
and blue in its In form. Suppose we put a few drops of this indicator in a strongly acidic
solution. If the solution is then titrated with NaOH, at what pH will the indicator color
change ﬁrst be visible?

Methyl orange indicator is yellow in basic
solution and red in acidic solution.

15.5 Acid–Base Indicators

(a)

(b)

713

(c)

FIGURE 15.7
(a) Yellow acid form of bromthymol blue; (b) a greenish tint is seen when the solution contains 1 part blue and
10 parts yellow; (c) blue basic form.

Solution
For bromthymol blue,
Ka  1.0  107 

3H 4 3 In 4
3HIn4

We assume that the color change is visible when
3In 4
1

3HIn4
10
That is, we assume that we can see the ﬁrst hint of a greenish tint (yellow plus a little
blue) when the solution contains 1 part blue and 10 parts yellow (see Fig. 15.7). Thus
3H 4 112
10
or pH  6.00

Ka  1.0  107 
3H 4  1.0  106
The color change is ﬁrst visible at pH 6.00.

See Exercises 15.65 through 15.68.

The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation is very useful in determining the pH at which
an indicator changes color. For example, application of Equation (15.2) to the Ka expression for the general indicator HIn yields
pH  pKa  log a

3In 4
b
3HIn4

where Ka is the dissociation constant for the acid form of the indicator (HIn). Since we
assume that the color change is visible when
3In 4
1

3HIn4
10

714

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
we have the following equation for determining the pH at which the color change occurs:
pH  pKa  log1 101 2  pKa  1
For bromthymol blue (Ka  1  107, or pKa  7), the pH at the color change is
pH  7  1  6
as we calculated in Sample Exercise 15.11.
When a basic solution is titrated, the indicator HIn will initially exist as In in solution, but as acid is added, more HIn will be formed. In this case the color change will be
visible when there is a mixture of 10 parts In and 1 part HIn. That is, a color change
from blue to blue-green will occur (see Fig. 15.7) due to the presence of some of the
yellow HIn molecules. This color change will be ﬁrst visible when
3In 4
10

3HIn4
1

Note that this is the reciprocal of the ratio for the titration of an acid. Substituting this
ratio into the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation gives
pH  pKa  log1 101 2  pKa  1
For bromthymol blue (pKa  7), we have a color change at
pH  7  1  8
In summary, when bromthymol blue is used for the titration of an acid, the starting
form will be HIn (yellow), and the color change occurs at a pH of about 6. When bromthymol blue is used for the titration of a base, the starting form is In (blue), and the color
change occurs at a pH of about 8. Thus the useful pH range for bromthymol blue is
pKa 1bromthymol blue2  1  7  1
or from 6 to 8. This is a general result. For a typical acid–base indicator with dissociation
constant Ka, the color transition occurs over a range of pH values given by pKa  1. The
useful pH ranges for several common indicators are shown in Fig. 15.8.
When we choose an indicator for a titration, we want the indicator end point (where
the color changes) and the titration equivalence point to be as close as possible. Choosing an indicator is easier if there is a large change in pH near the equivalence point of the
titration. The dramatic change in pH near the equivalence point in a strong acid–strong
base titration (Figs. 15.1 and 15.2) produces a sharp end point; that is, the complete color
change (from the acid-to-base or base-to-acid colors) usually occurs over one drop of
added titrant.
What indicator should we use for the titration of 100.00 mL of 0.100 M HCl
with 0.100 M NaOH? We know that the equivalence point occurs at pH 7.00. In the
initially acidic solution, the indicator will be predominantly in the HIn form. As OH
ions are added, the pH increases rather slowly at ﬁrst (see Fig. 15.1) and then rises
rapidly at the equivalence point. This sharp change causes the indicator dissociation
equilibrium
HIn ∆ H  In
Universal indicator paper can be used to
estimate the pH of a solution.

to shift suddenly to the right, producing enough In ions to give a color change. Since
we are titrating an acid, the indicator is predominantly in the acid form initially. Therefore, the ﬁrst observable color change will occur at a pH where
3In 4
1

3HIn4
10

Thus

pH  pKa  log1 101 2  pKa  1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

The pH ranges shown are approximate. Specific transition ranges depend on the indicator solvent chosen.

1

10

11

12

FIGURE 15.8
The useful pH ranges for several common indicators. Note that most indicators have a useful range of about two pH units, as predicted by the expression pKa  1.

* Trademark CIBA GEIGY CORP.

Alizarin Yellow R

Thymolphthalein

Phenolphthalein

o-Cresolphthalein

m-Nitrophenol

Phenol Red

Bromthymol Blue

Alizarin

Bromcresol Purple

Eriochrome* Black T

Methyl Red

Bromcresol Green

Methyl Orange

Bromphenol Blue

2,4-Dinitrophenol

Erythrosin B

Thymol Blue

Cresol Red

Crystal Violet

0

pH
13

14

15.5 Acid–Base Indicators

715

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

NaOH Added (mL)

pH

99.99
100.00
100.01

5.3
7.0
8.7

If we want an indicator that changes color at pH 7, we can use this relationship to ﬁnd
the pKa value for a suitable indicator:
pH  7  pKa  1 or

pKa  7  1  8

Thus an indicator with a pKa value of 8 (Ka  1  108) changes color at about pH 7
and is ideal for marking the end point for a strong acid–strong base titration.
How crucial is it for a strong acid–strong base titration that the indicator change color
exactly at pH 7? We can answer this question by examining the pH change near the equivalence point of the titration of 100 mL of 0.10 M HCl and 0.10 M NaOH. The data for a
few points at or near the equivalence point are shown in Table 15.3. Note that in going
from 99.99 to 100.01 mL of added NaOH solution (about half of a drop), the pH changes
from 5.3 to 8.7—a very dramatic change. This behavior leads to the following general
conclusions about indicators for a strong acid–strong base titration:
Indicator color changes will be sharp, occurring with the addition of a single drop of
titrant.
There is a wide choice of suitable indicators. The results will agree within one drop
of titrant, using indicators with end points as far apart as pH 5 and pH 9 (see Fig. 15.9).
The titration of weak acids is somewhat different. Figure 15.4 shows that the weaker
the acid being titrated, the smaller the vertical area around the equivalence point. This allows much less ﬂexibility in choosing the indicator. We must choose an indicator whose
useful pH range has a midpoint as close as possible to the pH at the equivalence point.
For example, we saw earlier that in the titration of 0.1 M HC2H3O2 with 0.1 M NaOH the
pH at the equivalence point is 8.7 (see Fig. 15.3). A good indicator choice would be phenolphthalein, since its useful pH range is 8 to 10. Thymol blue (changes color, pH 8–9)
also would be acceptable, but methyl red would not. The choice of an indicator is illustrated graphically in Fig. 15.10.

14
12
14

10

12
pH

TABLE 15.3 Selected pH Values
Near the Equivalence Point in
the Titration of 100.0 mL of
0.10 M HCl with 0.10 M NaOH

10

Phenolphthalein

8
pH

716

Equivalence
point

6

Methyl red

4

0

6

0

20
40
60
80 100 120
Vol 0.100 M NaOH added (mL)

FIGURE 15.9
The pH curve for the titration of 100.0 mL of
0.10 M HCl with 0.10 M NaOH. Note that the
end points of phenolphthalein and methyl
red occur at virtually the same amounts of
added NaOH.

Methyl red

4
2
0

2

Phenolphthalein

Equivalence
8
point

0

20
40
60
80 100 120
Vol 0.100 M NaOH added (mL)

FIGURE 15.10
The pH curve for the titration of 50 mL of
0.1 M HC2H3O2 with 0.1 M NaOH. Phenolphthalein will give an end point very close to
the equivalence point of the titration. Methyl
red would change color well before the equivalence point (so the end point would be very
different from the equivalence point) and
would not be a suitable indicator for this
titration.

15.6 Solubility Equilibria and the Solubility Product

717

Solubility Equilibria

15.6

Adding F to drinking water is controversial. See Geoff Rayner-Canham, “Fluoride:
Trying to Separate Fact from Fallacy,”
Chem 13 News, Sept. 2001, pp. 16–19.

For simplicity, we will ignore the effects
of ion associations in these solutions.

Solubility Equilibria and the Solubility Product

Solubility is a very important phenomenon. The fact that substances such as sugar and
table salt dissolve in water allows us to ﬂavor foods easily. The fact that calcium sulfate
is less soluble in hot water than in cold water causes it to coat tubes in boilers, reducing
thermal efﬁciency. Tooth decay involves solubility: When food lodges between the teeth,
acids form that dissolve tooth enamel, which contains a mineral called hydroxyapatite,
Ca5(PO4)3OH. Tooth decay can be reduced by treating teeth with ﬂuoride (see Chemical
Impact, p. 720). Fluoride replaces the hydroxide in hydroxyapatite to produce the corresponding ﬂuorapatite, Ca5(PO4)3F, and calcium ﬂuoride, CaF2, both of which are less
soluble in acids than the original enamel. Another important consequence of solubility involves the use of a suspension of barium sulfate to improve the clarity of X rays of the
gastrointestinal tract. The very low solubility of barium sulfate, which contains the toxic
ion Ba2, makes ingestion of the compound safe.
In this section we consider the equilibria associated with solids dissolving to form
aqueous solutions. We will assume that when a typical ionic solid dissolves in water, it
dissociates completely into separate hydrated cations and anions. For example, calcium
ﬂuoride dissolves in water as follows:
CaF2 1s2 ¡ Ca2 1aq2  2F 1aq2
H2O

When the solid salt is ﬁrst added to the water, no Ca2 and F ions are present. However,
as the dissolution proceeds, the concentrations of Ca2 and F increase, making it more
and more likely that these ions will collide and re-form the solid phase. Thus two competing processes are occurring—the dissolution reaction and its reverse:
Ca2 1aq2  2F 1aq2 ¡ CaF2 1s2
Ultimately, dynamic equilibrium is reached:
CaF2 1s2 ∆ Ca2 1aq2  2F 1aq2
At this point no more solid dissolves (the solution is said to be saturated).
We can write an equilibrium expression for this process according to the law of mass
action:
Ksp  3Ca2 4 3 F 4 2

An X ray of the lower gastrointestinal
tract using barium sulfate.

Pure liquids and pure solids are never
included in an equilibrium expression
(Section 13.4).

where [Ca2] and [F] are expressed in mol/L. The constant Ksp is called the solubility
product constant or simply the solubility product for the equilibrium expression.
Since CaF2 is a pure solid, it is not included in the equilibrium expression. The fact
that the amount of excess solid present does not affect the position of the solubility equilibrium might seem strange at ﬁrst; more solid means more surface area exposed to the
solvent, which would seem to result in greater solubility. This is not the case, however.
When the ions in solution re-form the solid, they do so on the surface of the solid. Thus
doubling the surface area of the solid not only doubles the rate of dissolving, but also doubles the rate of re-formation of the solid. The amount of excess solid present therefore
has no effect on the equilibrium position. Similarly, although either increasing the surface
area by grinding up the solid or stirring the solution speeds up the attainment of equilibrium, neither procedure changes the amount of solid dissolved at equilibrium. Neither the
amount of excess solid nor the size of the particles present will shift the position of the
solubility equilibrium.
It is very important to distinguish between the solubility of a given solid and its solubility product. The solubility product is an equilibrium constant and has only one value

718

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

TABLE 15.4
Ionic Solid
Fluorides
BaF2
MgF2
PbF2
SrF2
CaF2

Ksp Values at 25ºC for Common Ionic Solids
Ksp (at 25ºC)
2.4
6.4
4
7.9
4.0

Chlorides
PbCl2
AgCl
Hg2Cl2*







10
109
108
1010
1011

Bromides
PbBr2
AgBr
Hg2Br2*

4.6  10
5.0  1013
1.3  1022

Iodides
PbI2
AgI
Hg2I2*

1.4  108
1.5  1016
4.5  1029

6

Sulfates
CaSO4
Ag2SO4
SrSO4
PbSO4
BaSO4

6.1
1.2
3.2
1.3
1.5

Chromates
SrCrO4

3.6  105

105
105
107
108
109

Ksp (at 25ºC)
9

2
8.5
9.0
2






10
1011
1012
1016

Carbonates
NiCO3
CaCO3
BaCO3
SrCO3
CuCO3
ZnCO3
MnCO3
FeCO3
Ag2CO3
CdCO3
PbCO3
MgCO3
Hg2CO3*

1.4
8.7
1.6
7
2.5
2
8.8
2.1
8.1
5.2
1.5
6.8
9.0















107
109
109
1010
1010
1010
1011
1011
1012
1012
1015
106
1015

Hydroxides
Ba(OH)2
Sr(OH)2
Ca(OH)2
AgOH
Mg(OH)2
Mn(OH)2
Cd(OH)2
Pb(OH)2
Fe(OH)2

5.0
3.2
1.3
2.0
8.9
2
5.9
1.2
1.8











103
104
106
108
1012
1013
1015
1015
1015

Hg2CrO4*
BaCrO4
Ag2CrO4
PbCrO4

5

1.6  105
1.6  1010
1.1  1018







Ionic Solid

Ionic Solid

Ksp (at 25ºC)

Co(OH)2
Ni(OH)2
Zn(OH)2
Cu(OH)2
Hg(OH)2
Sn(OH)2
Cr(OH)3
Al(OH)3
Fe(OH)3
Co(OH)3

2.5
1.6
4.5
1.6
3
3
6.7
2
4
2.5

Sulﬁdes
MnS
FeS
NiS
CoS
ZnS
SnS
CdS
PbS
CuS
Ag2S
HgS

2.3  1013
3.7  1019
3  1021
5  1022
2.5  1022
1  1026
1.0  1028
7  1029
8.5  1045
1.6  1049
1.6  1054

Phosphates
Ag3PO4
Sr3(PO4)2
Ca3(PO4)2
Ba3(PO4)2
Pb3(PO4)2

1.8
1
1.3
6
1












1016
1016
1017
1019
1026
1027
1031
1032
1038
1043

 1018
 1031
 1032
 1039
 1054

*Contains Hg22 ions. K  [Hg22][X]2 for Hg2X2 salts, for example.

Visualization: Solution
Equilibrium

Visualization: Supersaturated
Sodium Acetate

for a given solid at a given temperature. Solubility, on the other hand, is an equilibrium
position. In pure water at a speciﬁc temperature a given salt has a particular solubility. On
the other hand, if a common ion is present in the solution, the solubility varies according
to the concentration of the common ion. However, in all cases the product of the ion concentrations must satisfy the Ksp expression. The Ksp values at 25°C for many common
ionic solids are listed in Table 15.4. The units are customarily omitted.
Solving solubility equilibria problems requires many of the same procedures we have
used to deal with acid–base equilibria, as illustrated in Sample Exercises 15.12 and 15.13.

Ksp is an equilibrium constant; solubility is
an equilibrium position.

Sample Exercise 15.12

Calculating Ksp from Solubility I
Copper(I) bromide has a measured solubility of 2.0  104 mol/L at 25°C. Calculate its
Ksp value.
Solution
In this experiment the solid was placed in contact with water. Thus, before any reaction
occurred, the system contained solid CuBr and H2O. The process that occurs is the
dissolving of CuBr to form the separated Cu and Br ions:
CuBr1s2 ∆ Cu 1aq2  Br 1aq2

15.6 Solubility Equilibria and the Solubility Product

719

Ksp  3Cu 4 3Br 4

where

Initially, the solution contains no Cu or Br, so the initial concentrations are
3Cu 4 0  3Br 4 0  0

The equilibrium concentrations can be obtained from the measured solubility of CuBr,
which is 2.0  104 mol/L. This means that 2.0  104 mol solid CuBr dissolves per 1.0
L of solution to come to equilibrium with the excess solid. The reaction is
CuBr1s2 ¡ Cu 1aq2  Br 1aq2

Thus
2.0  104 mol/L CuBr1s2
¡ 2.0  104 mol/L Cu 1aq2  2.0  104 mol/L Br 1aq2
We can now write the equilibrium concentrations:

3 Cu 4  3Cu 4 0  change to reach equilibrium
 0  2.0  104 mol/L
3Br 4  3Br 4 0  change to reach equilibrium
 0  2.0  104 mol/L

and

These equilibrium concentrations allow us to calculate the value of Ksp for CuBr:
Ksp  3Cu 4 3 Br 4  12.0  104 mol/L212.0  104 mol/L2
 4.0  108 mol2/L2  4.0  108

The units for Ksp values are usually omitted.

Sample Exercise 15.13

See Exercise 15.77.

Calculating Ksp from Solubility II
Calculate the Ksp value for bismuth sulﬁde (Bi2S3), which has a solubility of 1.0  1015
mol/L at 25°C.
Solution
The system initially contains H2O and solid Bi2S3, which dissolves as follows:
Bi2S3 1s2 ∆ 2Bi3 1aq2  3S2 1aq2

Therefore,

Ksp  3Bi3 4 2 3S2 4 3

Since no Bi3 and S2 ions were present in solution before the Bi2S3 dissolved,
3Bi3 4 0  3S2 4 0  0

Thus the equilibrium concentrations of these ions will be determined by the amount of
salt that dissolves to reach equilibrium, which in this case is 1.0  1015 mol/L. Since
each Bi2S3 unit contains 2Bi3 and 3S2 ions:
Precipitation of bismuth sulﬁde.

1.0  1015 mol/L Bi2S3 1s2
¡ 211.0  1015 mol/L2 Bi3 1aq2  311.0  1015 mol/L2 S2 1aq2

The equilibrium concentrations are
3Bi3 4  3Bi3 4 0  change  0  2.0  1015 mol/L
3S2 4  3S2 4 0  change  0  3.0  1015 mol/L

Sulﬁde is a very basic anion and really
exists in water as HS. We will not
consider this complication.

Then
Solubilities must be expressed in mol/L in
Ksp calculations.

Ksp  3Bi3 4 2 3S2 4 3  12.0  1015 2 2 13.0  1015 2 3  1.1  1073
See Exercises 15.78 through 15.80.

720

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Chemistry of Teeth
f dental chemistry continues to progress at the present rate,
tooth decay may soon be a thing of the past. Cavities are
holes that develop in tooth enamel, which is composed of
the mineral hydroxyapatite, Ca5(PO4)3OH. Recent research
has shown that there is constant dissolving and re-forming
of the tooth mineral in the saliva at the tooth’s surface. Demineralization (dissolving of tooth enamel) is mainly caused
by weak acids in the saliva created by bacteria as they
metabolize carbohydrates in food. (The solubility of Ca5
(PO4)3OH in acidic saliva should come as no surprise to you
if you understand how pH affects the solubility of a salt with
basic anions.)
In the ﬁrst stages of tooth decay, parts of the tooth surface become porous and spongy and develop swiss-cheese-like
holes that, if untreated, eventually turn into cavities (see photo).
However, recent results indicate that if the affected tooth is
bathed in a solution containing appropriate amounts of Ca2,
PO43, and F, it remineralizes. Because the F replaces OH
in the tooth mineral (Ca5(PO4)3OH is changed to Ca5(PO4)3F),
the remineralized area is more resistant to future decay, since
ﬂuoride is a weaker base than hydroxide ion. In addition, it
has been shown that the presence of Sr2 in the remineralizing ﬂuid signiﬁcantly increases resistance to decay.
If these results hold up under further study, the work of
dentists will change dramatically. Dentists will be much

I

X-ray photo showing decay (dark area) on the molar (right).

more involved in preventing damage to teeth than in repairing damage that has already occurred. One can picture the
routine use of a remineralization rinse that will repair problem areas before they become cavities. Dental drills could
join leeches as a medical anachronism.

We have seen that the experimentally determined solubility of an ionic solid can be
used to calculate its Ksp value.* The reverse is also possible: The solubility of an ionic
solid can be calculated if its Ksp value is known.
Sample Exercise 15.14

Calculating Solubility from Ksp
The Ksp value for copper(II) iodate, Cu(IO3)2, is 1.4  107 at 25C. Calculate its solubility at 25C.
Solution
The system initially contains H2O and solid Cu(IO3)2, which dissolves according to the
following equilibrium:
Cu1IO3 2 2 1s2 ∆ Cu2 1aq2  2IO3 1aq2
Therefore,

Ksp  3Cu2 4 3 IO3 4 2

*This calculation assumes that all the dissolved solid is present as separated ions. In some cases, such as
CaSO4, large numbers of ion pairs exist in solution, so this method yields an incorrect value for Ksp.

15.6 Solubility Equilibria and the Solubility Product

721

To ﬁnd the solubility of Cu(IO3)2, we must ﬁnd the equilibrium concentrations of the Cu2
and IO3 ions. We do this in the usual way by specifying the initial concentrations (before
any solid has dissolved) and then deﬁning the change required to reach equilibrium. Since
in this case we do not know the solubility, we will assume that x mol/L of the solid
dissolves to reach equilibrium. The 1:2 stoichiometry of the salt means that
x mol/L Cu1IO3 2 2 1s2 ¡ x mol/L Cu2 1aq2  2x mol/L IO3 1aq2
The concentrations are as follows:
Initial
Concentration (mol/L)
(before any Cu(IO3)2 dissolves)

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)
x mol/L
dissolves
----¡
to reach
equilibrium

3Cu2 4 0  0
3IO3 4 0  0

3Cu2 4  x
3IO3 4  2x

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the expression for Ksp gives
1.4  107  Ksp  3Cu2 4 3IO3 4 2  1x212x2 2  4x3

Then

3
x 2
3.5  108  3.3  103 mol/L

Thus the solubility of solid Cu(IO3)2 is 3.3  103 mol/L.
See Exercises 15.81 and 15.82.

Relative Solubilities
A salt’s Ksp value gives us information about its solubility. However, we must be careful
in using Ksp values to predict the relative solubilities of a group of salts. There are two
possible cases:
1. The salts being compared produce the same number of ions. For example, consider
AgI1s2
CuI1s2
CaSO4 1s2

Ksp  1.5  1016
Ksp  5.0  1012
Ksp  6.1  105

Each of these solids dissolves to produce two ions:
Salt ∆ cation  anion
Ksp  3cation4 3 anion 4
If x is the solubility in mol/L, then at equilibrium
3Cation4  x
3Anion4  x
Ksp  3cation4 3 anion 4  x2
x  1Ksp  solubility
Therefore, in this case we can compare the solubilities for these solids by comparing
the Ksp values:
CaSO4 1s2
Most soluble;
largest Ksp

7 CuI1s2 7

AgI1s2
Least soluble;
smallest Ksp

722

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

TABLE 15.5 Calculated Solubilities for CuS, Ag2S,
and Bi2S3 at 25ºC
Salt

Ksp

Calculated
Solubility (mol/L)

CuS
Ag2S
Bi2S3

8.5  1045
1.6  1049
1.1  1073

9.2  1023
3.4  1017
1.0  1015

2. The salts being compared produce different numbers of ions. For example, consider
CuS1s2
Ag2S1s2
Bi2S3 1s2

Ksp  8.5  1045
Ksp  1.6  1049
Ksp  1.1  1073

Because these salts produce different numbers of ions when they dissolve, the Ksp values
cannot be compared directly to determine relative solubilities. In fact, if we calculate
the solubilities (using the procedure in Sample Exercise 15.14), we obtain the results
summarized in Table 15.5. The order of solubilities is
Bi2S3 1s2

7 Ag2S1s2 7

Most soluble

CuS1s2
Least soluble

which is opposite to the order of the Ksp values.
Remember that relative solubilities can be predicted by comparing Ksp values only for
salts that produce the same total number of ions.

Common Ion Effect
So far we have considered ionic solids dissolved in pure water. We will now see what
happens when the water contains an ion in common with the dissolving salt. For example, consider the solubility of solid silver chromate 1Ag2CrO4, Ksp  9.0  1012 2 in a
0.100 M solution of AgNO3. Before any Ag2CrO4 dissolves, the solution contains the major
species Ag, NO3, and H2O, with solid Ag2CrO4 on the bottom of the container. Since
NO3 is not found in Ag2CrO4, we can ignore it. The relevant initial concentrations (before
any Ag2CrO4 dissolves) are
3Ag 4 0  0.100 M 1from the dissolved AgNO3 2
3CrO42 4 0  0

The system comes to equilibrium as the solid Ag2CrO4 dissolves according to the reaction
Ag2CrO4 1s2 ∆ 2Ag 1aq2  CrO42 1aq2

for which

Ksp  3Ag 4 2 3CrO42 4  9.0  1012

We assume that x mol/L of Ag2CrO4 dissolves to reach equilibrium, which means that
x mol/L Ag2CrO4 1s2 ¡ 2x mol/L Ag 1aq2  x mol/L CrO42

Now we can specify the equilibrium concentrations in terms of x:
3Ag 4  3Ag 4 0  change  0.100  2x
3CrO42 4  3CrO42 4 0  change  0  x  x
A potassium chromate solution being added
to aqueous silver nitrate, forming silver
chromate.

Substituting these concentrations into the expression for Ksp gives

9.0  1012  3Ag 4 2 3CrO42 4  10.100  2x2 2 1x2

15.6 Solubility Equilibria and the Solubility Product

723

The mathematics required here appear to be complicated, since the multiplication of terms
on the right-hand side produces an expression that contains an x3 term. However, as is
usually the case, we can make simplifying assumptions. Since the Ksp value for Ag2CrO4
is small (the position of the equilibrium lies far to the left), x is expected to be small compared with 0.100 M. Therefore, 0.100  2x  0.100, which allows simpliﬁcation of the
expression:
9.0  1012  10.100  2x2 2 1x2  10.1002 2 1x2
x

Then

9.0  1012
 9.0  1010 mol/L
10.1002 2

Since x is much less than 0.100 M, the approximation is valid (by the 5% rule). Thus
Solubility of Ag2CrO4 in 0.100 M AgNO3  x  9.0  1010 mol/L
and the equilibrium concentrations are
3Ag 4  0.100  2x  0.100  219.0  1010 2  0.100 M
3 CrO42 4  x  9.0  1010 M
Now we compare the solubilities of Ag2CrO4 in pure water and in 0.100 M AgNO3:
Solubility of Ag2CrO4 in pure water  1.3  104 mol/L
Solubility of Ag2CrO4 in 0.100 M AgNO3  9.0  1010 mol/L
Note that the solubility of Ag2CrO4 is much less in the presence of Ag ions from AgNO3.
This is another example of the common ion effect. The solubility of a solid is lowered if
the solution already contains ions common to the solid.
Sample Exercise 15.15

Solubility and Common Ions

Calculate the solubility of solid CaF2 1Ksp  4.0  1011 2 in a 0.025 M NaF solution.
Solution
Before any CaF2 dissolves, the solution contains the major species Na, F, and H2O. The
solubility equilibrium for CaF2 is
CaF2 1s2 ∆ Ca2 1aq2  2F 1aq2

Ksp  4.0  1011  3Ca2 4 3F 4 2

and
Initial
Concentration (mol/L)
(before any CaF2 dissolves)
3 Ca2 4 0  0
3 F 4 0  0.025 M
p
From 0.025 M NaF

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)
x mol/L CaF2
dissolves
8888888888n
to reach
equilibrium

3Ca2 4  x
3F 4  0.025  2x
p
p
From NaF
From CaF2

Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the expression for Ksp gives
Ksp  4.0  1011  3Ca2 4 3 F 4 2  1x210.025  2x2 2

Assuming that 2x is negligible compared with 0.025 (since Ksp is small) gives
4.0  1011  1x210.0252 2
x  6.4  108

724

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
The approximation is valid (by the 5% rule), and
Solubility  x  6.4  108 mol/L
Thus 6.4  108 mol solid CaF2 dissolves per liter of the 0.025 M NaF solution.
See Exercises 15.89 through 15.92.

pH and Solubility
The pH of a solution can greatly affect a salt’s solubility. For example, magnesium
hydroxide dissolves according to the equilibrium
Mg1OH2 2 1s2 ∆ Mg2 1aq2  2OH 1aq2
Addition of OH ions (an increase in pH) will, by the common ion effect, force the equilibrium to the left, decreasing the solubility of Mg(OH)2. On the other hand, an addition
of H ions (a decrease in pH) increases the solubility, because OH ions are removed
from solution by reacting with the added H ions. In response to the lower concentration
of OH, the equilibrium position moves to the right. This is why a suspension of solid
Mg(OH)2, known as milk of magnesia, dissolves as required in the stomach to combat
excess acidity.
This idea also applies to salts with other types of anions. For example, the solubility
of silver phosphate (Ag3PO4) is greater in acid than in pure water because the PO43 ion
is a strong base that reacts with H to form the HPO42 ion. The reaction
H  PO43 ¡ HPO42
occurs in acidic solution, thus lowering the concentration of PO43 and shifting the solubility equilibrium
Ag3PO4 1s2 ∆ 3Ag 1aq2  PO43 1aq2
to the right. This, in turn, increases the solubility of silver phosphate.
Silver chloride (AgCl), however, has the same solubility in acid as in pure water.
Why? Since the Cl ion is a very weak base (that is, HCl is a very strong acid), no HCl
molecules are formed. Thus the addition of H to a solution containing Cl does not affect [Cl ] and has no effect on the solubility of a chloride salt.
The general rule is that if the anion X is an effective base—that is, if HX is a weak
acid—the salt MX will show increased solubility in an acidic solution. Examples of common anions that are effective bases are OH, S2, CO32, C2O42, and CrO42. Salts containing these anions are much more soluble in an acidic solution than in pure water.
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, one practical result of the increased
solubility of carbonates in acid is the formation of huge limestone caves such as Mammoth Cave in Kentucky and Carlsbad Caverns in New Mexico. Carbon dioxide dissolved
in groundwater makes it acidic, increasing the solubility of calcium carbonate and eventually producing huge caverns. As the carbon dioxide escapes to the air, the pH of the
dripping water goes up and the calcium carbonate precipitates, forming stalactites and
stalagmites.

15.7

Precipitation and Qualitative Analysis

So far we have considered solids dissolving in solutions. Now we will consider the reverse
process—the formation of a solid from solution. When solutions are mixed, various reactions can occur. We have already considered acid–base reactions in some detail. In this
section we show how to predict whether a precipitate will form when two solutions are

15.7 Precipitation and Qualitative Analysis

725

mixed. We will use the ion product, which is deﬁned just like the expression for Ksp for
a given solid except that initial concentrations are used instead of equilibrium concentrations. For solid CaF2, the expression for the ion product Q is written
Q  3Ca2 4 0 3F 4 02

If we add a solution containing Ca2 ions to a solution containing F ions, a precipitate may or may not form, depending on the concentrations of these ions in the resulting
mixed solution. To predict whether precipitation will occur, we consider the relationship
between Q and Ksp.
Q is used here in a very similar way to
the use of the reaction quotient in
Chapter 13.

Sample Exercise 15.16

If Q is greater than Ksp, precipitation occurs and will continue until the concentrations are reduced to the point that they satisfy Ksp.
If Q is less than Ksp, no precipitation occurs.

Determining Precipitation Conditions
A solution is prepared by adding 750.0 mL of 4.00  103 M Ce(NO3)3 to 300.0 mL of
2.00  102 M KIO3. Will Ce(IO3)3 (Ksp  1.9  1010) precipitate from this solution?

Ce3+ and IO3–
Determine initial
concentrations

Solution
First, we calculate [Ce3]0 and [IO3]0 in the mixed solution before any reaction occurs:
1750.0 mL214.00  103 mmol/mL2
 2.86  103 M
1750.0  300.02 mL
1300.0 mL212.00  102 mmol/mL2
3IO3 4 0 
 5.71  103 M
1750.0  300.02 mL

Ion product is
[Ce3+]0 [IO3–]03

3 Ce3 4 0 

Find Q

Is Q > Ksp?

The ion product for Ce(IO3)3 is

Q  3Ce3 4 0 3IO3 4 03  12.86  103 215.71  103 2 3  5.32  1010

No

Yes

Since Q is greater than Ksp, Ce(IO3)3 will precipitate from the mixed solution.
See Exercises 15.97 and 15.98.

No
precipitation

Precipitation of
Ce(IO3)3

For Ce(IO3)3(s), Ksp  [Ce3][IO3]3.

Sometimes we want to do more than simply predict whether precipitation will occur;
we may want to calculate the equilibrium concentrations in the solution after precipitation occurs. For example, let us calculate the equilibrium concentrations of Pb2 and I
ions in a solution formed by mixing 100.0 mL of 0.0500 M Pb(NO3)2 and 200.0 mL of
0.100 M NaI. First, we must determine whether solid PbI2 (Ksp  1.4  108 ) forms when
the solutions are mixed. To do so, we need to calculate [Pb2]0 and [I ] 0 before any
reaction occurs:
1100.0 mL210.0500 mmol/mL2
mmol Pb2

 1.67  102 M
mL solution
300.0 mL
1200.0 mL210.100 mmol/mL2
mmol I
3I 4 0 

 6.67  102 M
mL solution
300.0 mL

3Pb2 4 0 

The ion product for PbI2 is

Q  3 Pb2 4 0 3I 4 02  11.67  102 216.67  102 2 2  7.43  105

Since Q is greater than Ksp, a precipitate of PbI2 will form.

726

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

The equilibrium constant for formation of
solid Pbl2 is 1 Ksp, or 7  107, so this
equilibrium lies far to the right.

Since the Ksp for PbI2 is quite small (1.4  108 ) , only very small quantities of Pb2
and I can coexist in aqueous solution. In other words, when Pb2 and I are mixed, most
of these ions will precipitate out as PbI2. That is, the reaction
Pb2 1aq2  2I 1aq2 ¡ PbI2 1s2

(which is the reverse of the dissolution reaction) goes essentially to completion.
If, when two solutions are mixed, a reaction occurs that goes virtually to completion,
it is essential to do the stoichiometry calculations before considering the equilibrium calculations. Therefore, in this case we let the system go completely in the direction toward
which it tends. Then we will let it adjust back to equilibrium. If we let Pb2 and I react
to completion, we have the following concentrations:

In this reaction 10 mmol I is in excess.

2I



Pb2

PbI2

¡

Before
reaction:

(100.0 mL)(0.0500 M)
 5.00 mmol

(200.0 mL)(0.100 M)
 20.0 mmol

After
reaction:

0 mmol

20.0  2(5.00)
 10.0 mmol

The amount of
PbI2 formed does
not inﬂuence
the equilibrium.

Next we must allow the system to adjust to equilibrium. At equilibrium [Pb2] is not
actually zero because the reaction does not go quite to completion. The best way to think
about this is that once the PbI2 is formed, a very small amount redissolves to reach equilibrium. Since I is in excess, the PbI2 is dissolving into a solution that contains 10.0 mmol
I per 300.0 mL of solution, or 3.33  102 M I.
We could state this problem as follows: What is the solubility of solid PbI2 in a
3.33  102 M NaI solution? The lead iodide dissolves according to the equation
PbI2 1s2 ∆ Pb2 1aq2  2I 1aq2

The concentrations are as follows:
Initial
Concentration (mol/L)
3Pb2 4 0  0
3I 4 0  3.33  102

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)
x mol/L
PbI2(s)
888888n
dissolves

3Pb2 4  x
3I 4  3.33  102  2x

Substituting into the expression for Ksp gives

Ksp  1.4  108  3Pb2 4 3I 4 2  1x213.33  102  2x2 2  1x213.33  102 2 2

Then

3Pb2 4  x  1.3  105 M
3I 4  3.33  102 M

Note that 3.33  102  2x, so the approximation is valid. These Pb2 and I concentrations thus represent the equilibrium concentrations present in a solution formed by
mixing 100.0 mL of 0.0500 M Pb(NO3)2 and 200.0 mL of 0.100 M NaI.
Sample Exercise 15.17

Precipitation
A solution is prepared by mixing 150.0 mL of 1.00  102 M Mg(NO3)2 and 250.0 mL
of 1.00  101 M NaF. Calculate the concentrations of Mg2 and F at equilibrium with
solid MgF2 (Ksp  6.4  109 ).

727

15.7 Precipitation and Qualitative Analysis
Solution
Mg2+, F–

The ﬁrst step is to determine whether solid MgF2 forms. To do this, we need to calculate
the concentrations of Mg2 and F in the mixed solution and ﬁnd Q:
1150.0 mL211.00  102 M2
mmol Mg2

 3.75  103 M
mL solution
400.0 mL
1250.0 mL211.00  101 M2
mmol F
3F 4 0 

 6.25  102 M
mL solution
400.0 mL
Q  3Mg2 4 0 3F 4 02  13.75  103 216.25  102 2 2  1.46  105

Find initial
concentrations

3Mg2 4 0 

[Mg2+]0 = 3.75 x 10–3 M
[F–]0 = 6.25 x 10–2 M
Find Q

Q = [Mg2+]0 [F–]02 = 1.46 x 10–5

Since Q is greater than Ksp, solid MgF2 will form.
The next step is to run the precipitation reaction to completion:

Q > Ksp




Mg2
Mg2+ + 2F–

MgF2(s)
Run reaction
to completion

Mg2+ is limiting
F– is in excess
Calculate
concentrations of
excess F–

[F–] excess = 5.50 x 10–2 M

2

2F

¡

MgF2(s)

1

Before
reaction:

(150.0)(1.00  10 )
 1.50 mmol

(250.0)(1.00  10 )
 25.0 mmol

After
reaction:

1.50  1.50  0

25.0  2(1.50)
 22.0 mmol

Note that excess F remains after the precipitation reaction goes to completion. The
concentration is
3F 4 excess 

22.0 mmol
 5.50  102 M
400.0 mL

Although we have assumed that the Mg2 is completely consumed, we know that
[Mg ] will not be zero at equilibrium. We can compute the equilibrium [Mg2] by letting MgF2 redissolve to satisfy the expression for Ksp. How much MgF2 will dissolve in
a 5.50  102 M NaF solution? We proceed as usual:
2

Determine [Mg2+] and
[F–] at equilibrium

MgF2 1s2 ∆ Mg2 1aq2  2F 1aq2
Ksp  3Mg2 4 3F 4 2  6.4  109

Ksp = [Mg2+][F–]2
6.4 x 10–9 = (x)(5.50 x 10–2 + 2x)2

[Mg2+] = 2.1 x 10–6 M
[F–] = 5.50 x 10–2 M

Initial
Concentration (mol/L)
3Mg2 4 0  0
3F 4 0  5.50  102

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)
x mol/L
MgF2(s)
888888n
dissolves

3Mg2 4  x
3 F 4  5.50  10 2  2x

Ksp  6.4  109  3Mg2 4 3 F 4 2
 1x215.50  102  2x2 2  1x215.50  102 2 2
3Mg2 4  x  2.1  106 M
3F 4  5.50  102 M
See Exercises 15.99 and 15.100.

Selective Precipitation
The approximations made here fall within
the 5% rule.

Mixtures of metal ions in aqueous solution are often separated by selective precipitation,
that is, by using a reagent whose anion forms a precipitate with only one or a few of the

728

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
metal ions in the mixture. For example, suppose we have a solution containing both Ba2
and Ag ions. If NaCl is added to the solution, AgCl precipitates as a white solid, but
since BaCl2 is soluble, the Ba2 ions remain in solution.

Sample Exercise 15.18

Selective Precipitation
A solution contains 1.0  104 M Cu and 2.0  103 M Pb2. If a source of I is added
gradually to this solution, will PbI2 (Ksp  1.4  108) or CuI (Ksp  5.3  1012) precipitate ﬁrst? Specify the concentration of I necessary to begin precipitation of each
salt.
Solution
For PbI2, the Ksp expression is

1.4  108  Ksp  3Pb2 4 3I 4 2

Since [Pb2] in this solution is known to be 2.0  103 M, the greatest concentration of
I that can be present without causing precipitation of PbI2 can be calculated from the Ksp
expression:
1.4  108  3Pb2 4 3 I 4 2  12.0  103 2 3 I 4 2
3I 4  2.6  103 M
Any I in excess of this concentration will cause solid PbI2 to form.
Similarly, for CuI, the Ksp expression is

5.3  1012  Ksp  3Cu 4 3I 4  11.0  104 2 3I 4

and

3I 4  5.3  108 M

A concentration of I in excess of 5.3  108 M will cause formation of solid CuI.
As I is added to the mixed solution, CuI will precipitate ﬁrst, since the [I ] required
is less. Therefore, Cu would be separated from Pb2 using this reagent.
See Exercises 15.101 and 15.102.

We can compare K sp values to ﬁnd
relative solubilities because FeS and MnS
produce the same number of ions in
solution.

Since metal sulﬁde salts differ dramatically in their solubilities, the sulﬁde ion is often used to separate metal ions by selective precipitation. For example, consider a solution containing a mixture of 103 M Fe2 and 103 M Mn2. Since FeS (Ksp  3.7 
1019) is much less soluble than MnS (Ksp  2.3  1013), careful addition of S2 to the
mixture will precipitate Fe2 as FeS, leaving Mn2 in solution.
One real advantage of the sulﬁde ion as a precipitating reagent is that because it is
basic, its concentration can be controlled by regulating the pH of the solution. H2S is a
diprotic acid that dissociates in two steps:
H2S ∆ H  HS
HS ∆ H  S2

Ka1  1.0  107
Ka2  1019

Note from the small Ka2 value that S2 ions have a high afﬁnity for protons. In an acidic
solution (large [H]), [S2] will be relatively small, since under these conditions the dissociation equilibria will lie far to the left. On the other hand, in basic solutions [S2] will
be relatively large, since the very small value of [H] will pull both equilibria to the right,
producing S2.

15.7 Precipitation and Qualitative Analysis

729

Solution of
Mn2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, Hg2+
Add H2S
(acidic, pH ≈ 2)

Precipitate of
CuS, HgS

FIGURE 15.11
The separation of Cu2 and Hg2 from Ni2
and Mn2 using H2S. At a low pH, [S2] is
relatively low and only the very insoluble
HgS and CuS precipitate. When OH is
added to lower [H], the value of [S2]
increases, and MnS and NiS precipitate.

Solution of
Mn2+, Ni2+
Add OH– to
bring pH to 8

Precipitate of
MnS, NiS

This means that the most insoluble sulﬁde salts, such as CuS (Ksp  8.5  1045)
and HgS (Ksp  1.6  1054), can be precipitated from an acidic solution, leaving the
more soluble ones, such as MnS (Ksp  2.3  1013) and NiS (Ksp  3  1021), still
dissolved. The manganese and nickel sulﬁdes can then be precipitated by making the
solution slightly basic. This procedure is diagramed in Fig. 15.11.

Qualitative Analysis
The classic scheme for qualitative analysis of a mixture containing all the common cations
(listed in Fig. 15.12) involves ﬁrst separating them into ﬁve major groups based on solubilities. (These groups are not directly related to the groups of the periodic table.) Each
group is then treated further to separate and identify the individual ions. We will be concerned here only with separation of the major groups.

Flame test for potassium.

Group I—Insoluble chlorides
When dilute aqueous HCl is added to a solution containing a mixture of the common
cations, only Ag, Pb2, and Hg22 will precipitate out as insoluble chlorides. All other
chlorides are soluble and remain in solution. The Group I precipitate is removed, leaving
the other ions in solution for treatment with sulﬁde ion.
Group II—Sulﬁdes insoluble in acid solution
After the insoluble chlorides are removed, the solution is still acidic, since HCl was added.
If H2S is added to this solution, only the most insoluble sulﬁdes (those of Hg2, Cd2,
Bi3, Cu2, and Sn4) will precipitate, since [S2] is relatively low because of the high
concentration of H. The more soluble sulﬁdes will remain dissolved under these conditions, and the precipitate of the insoluble salt is removed.

Flame test for sodium.

Group III—Sulﬁdes insoluble in basic solution
The solution is made basic at this stage, and more H2S is added. As we saw earlier, a basic
solution produces a higher [S2], which leads to precipitation of the more soluble sulﬁdes.
The cations precipitated as sulﬁdes at this stage are Co2, Zn2, Mn2, Ni2, and Fe2. If
any Cr3 and Al3 ions are present, they also will precipitate, but as insoluble hydroxides
(remember the solution is now basic). The precipitate is separated from the solution
containing the rest of the ions.

730

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

Solution of Hg22+, Ag+, Pb2+, Hg2+, Cd2+, Bi3+, Cu2+, Sn4+, Co2+, Zn2+, Mn2+, Ni2+,
Fe2+, Cr3+, Al3+, Ca2+, Ba2+, Mg2+, NH4+, Na+, K+
Add HCl (aq)

Precipitate of Hg2Cl2, AgCl, PbCl2
(Group I)

Solution of
Groups II–IV
Add H2S (aq)

Precipitate of HgS, CdS, Bi2S3,
CuS, SnS2 (Group II)

Solution of
Groups III–V
Add NaOH (aq)

Precipitate of CoS, ZnS, MnS, NiS,
FeS, Cr(OH)3, Al(OH)3 (Group III)

Solution of
Groups IV, V
Add Na2CO3 (aq)

FIGURE 15.12
A schematic diagram of the classic method
for separating the common cations by
selective precipitation.

Precipitate of CaCO3, BaCO3,
MgCO3 (Group IV)

Solution of
Group V

Group IV—Insoluble carbonates
At this point, all the cations have been precipitated except those from Groups 1A and 2A
of the periodic table. The Group 2A cations form insoluble carbonates and can be precipitated by the addition of CO32. For example, Ba2, Ca2, and Mg2 form solid
carbonates and can be removed from the solution.

From left to right, cadmium sulﬁde,
chromium(III) hydroxide, aluminum
hydroxide, and nickel(II) hydroxide.

15.8 Equilibria Involving Complex Ions

731

Group V—Alkali metal and ammonium ions
The only ions remaining in solution at this point are the Group 1A cations and the NH4
ion, all of which form soluble salts with the common anions. The Group 1A cations are
usually identiﬁed by the characteristic colors they produce when heated in a ﬂame. These
colors are due to the emission spectra of these ions.
The qualitative analysis scheme for cations based on the selective precipitation procedure described above is summarized in Fig. 15.12.

Complex Ion Equilibria

15.8

A complex ion is a charged species consisting of a metal ion surrounded by ligands. A
ligand is simply a Lewis base—a molecule or ion having a lone electron pair that can be
donated to an empty orbital on the metal ion to form a covalent bond. Some common ligands are H2O, NH3, Cl, and CN. The number of ligands attached to a metal ion is called
the coordination number. The most common coordination numbers are 6, for example,
in Co(H2O)62 and Ni(NH3)62; 4, for example, in CoCl42 and Cu(NH3)42; and 2, for
example, in Ag(NH3)2; but others are known.
The properties of complex ions will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 21. For
now, we will just look at the equilibria involving these species. Metal ions add ligands
one at a time in steps characterized by equilibrium constants called formation constants
or stability constants. For example, when solutions containing Ag ions and NH3 molecules are mixed, the following reactions take place:
Ag  NH3 ∆ Ag1NH3 2 
Ag1NH3 2   NH3 ∆ Ag1NH3 2 2

K1  2.1  103
K2  8.2  103

where K1 and K2 are the formation constants for the two steps. In a solution containing
Ag and NH3, all the species NH3, Ag, Ag(NH3), and Ag(NH3)2 exist at equilibrium.
Calculating the concentrations of all these components can be complicated. However, usually the total concentration of the ligand is much larger than the total concentration of the
metal ion, and approximations can greatly simplify the problems.
For example, consider a solution prepared by mixing 100.0 mL of 2.0 M NH3 with
100.0 mL of 1.0  103 M AgNO3. Before any reaction occurs, the mixed solution contains
the major species Ag, NO3, NH3, and H2O. What reaction or reactions will occur in
this solution? From our discussions of acid–base chemistry, we know that one reaction is
NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2
However, we are interested in the reaction between NH3 and Ag to form complex
ions, and since the position of the preceding equilibrium lies far to the left (Kb for
NH3 is 1.8  105), we can neglect the amount of NH3 used up in the reaction with
water. Therefore, before any complex ion formation, the concentrations in the mixed
solution are
3Ag 4 0 

1100.0 mL211.0  103 M2
 5.0  104 M
1200.0 mL2
n

CoCl42

Equilibria Involving Complex Ions

Total volume

3NH3 4 0 

1100.0 mL212.0 M2
 1.0 M
1200.0 mL2

732

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
As mentioned already, the Ag ion reacts with NH3 in a stepwise fashion to form AgNH3
and then Ag(NH3)2:
Ag  NH3 ∆ Ag1NH3 2 
Ag1NH3 2   NH3 ∆ Ag1NH3 2 2

K1  2.1  103
K2  8.2  103

Since both K1 and K2 are large, and since there is a large excess of NH3, both reactions
can be assumed to go essentially to completion. This is equivalent to writing the net reaction in the solution as follows:
Ag  2NH3 ¡ Ag1NH3 2 2
The relevant stoichiometric calculations are as follows:
Ag
5.0  10
0

M

2NH3

Ag(NH3)2

888n

1.0 M
1.0  2(5.0  104)  1.0 M

0
5.0  104 M

n

Before reaction:
After reaction:



4

A solution containing the blue CoCl42
complex ion.

Twice as much NH3 as
Ag is required

Note that in this case we have used molarities when performing the stoichiometry
calculations and we have assumed this reaction to be complete, using all the original Ag
to form Ag(NH3)2. In reality, a very small amount of the Ag(NH3)2 formed will dissociate to produce small amounts of Ag(NH3) and Ag. However, since the amount of
Ag(NH3)2 dissociating will be so small, we can safely assume that [Ag(NH3)2] is
5.0  104 M at equilibrium. Also, we know that since so little NH3 has been consumed,
[NH3] is 1.0 M at equilibrium. We can use these concentrations to calculate [Ag] and
[Ag(NH3)] using the K1 and K2 expressions.
To calculate the equilibrium concentration of Ag(NH3), we use
K2  8.2  103 

3Ag1NH3 2 2 4
3Ag1NH3 2  4 3NH3 4

since [Ag(NH3)2] and [NH3] are known. Rearranging and solving for [Ag(NH3)] give
Visualization: Nickel(II)
Complexes

3Ag1NH3 2  4 

3Ag1NH3 2 2 4
5.0  104

 6.1  108 M
K2 3NH3 4
18.2  103 211.02

Now the equilibrium concentration of Ag can be calculated using K1:
K1  2.1  103 
3Ag 4 

3Ag1NH3 2  4
6.1  108

3Ag 4 3NH3 4
3Ag 4 11.02

6.1  108
 2.9  1011 M
12.1  103 211.02

So far we have assumed that Ag(NH3)2 is the dominant silver-containing species in
solution. Is this a valid assumption? The calculated concentrations are
3Ag1NH3 2 2 4  5.0  104 M
3Ag1NH3 2  4  6.1  108 M
3Ag 4  2.9  1011 M
Essentially all the Ag ions originally
present end up in Ag(NH3)2.

These values clearly support the conclusion that
3Ag1NH3 2 2 4  3Ag1NH3 2  4  3Ag 4

15.8 Equilibria Involving Complex Ions

733

Thus the assumption that Ag(NH3)2 is the dominant Ag-containing species is valid, and
the calculated concentrations are correct.
This analysis shows that although complex ion equilibria have many species present
and look complicated, the calculations are actually quite straightforward, especially if the
ligand is present in large excess.

Sample Exercise 15.19

Complex Ions
Calculate the concentrations of Ag, Ag(S2O3), and Ag(S2O3)23 in a solution prepared
by mixing 150.0 mL of 1.00  103 M AgNO3 with 200.0 mL of 5.00 M Na2S2O3. The
stepwise formation equilibria are
Ag  S2O32 ∆ Ag1S2O3 2 
Ag1S2O3 2   S2O32 ∆ Ag1S2O3 2 23

K1  7.4  108
K2  3.9  104

Solution
The concentrations of the ligand and metal ion in the mixed solution before any reaction
occurs are
1150.0 mL211.00  103 M2
 4.29  104 M
1150.0 mL  200.0 mL2
1200.0 mL215.00 M2
3S2O32 4 0 
 2.86 M
1150.0 mL  200.0 mL2
3Ag 4 0 

Ag (S2O3)23–

Since [S2O32]0  [Ag]0, and since K1 and K2 are large, both formation reactions can be
assumed to go to completion, and the net reaction in the solution is as follows:

Ag
Before
reaction:

4.29  10

After
reaction:

0


4

88n

2S2O32

M

Ag(S2O3)23

2.86 M

0

2.86  2(4.29  104)
 2.86 M

4.29  104 M

Note that Ag is limiting and that the amount of S2O32 consumed is negligible. Also note
that since all these species are in the same solution, the molarities can be used to do the
stoichiometry problem.
Of course, the concentration of Ag is not zero at equilibrium, and there is some
Ag(S2O3) in the solution. To calculate the concentrations of these species, we must use
the K1 and K2 expressions. We can calculate the concentration of Ag(S2O3) from K2:
3.9  104  K2 

3Ag1S2O3 2 23 4

3Ag1S2O3 2 4 3 S2O3 4


2



3Ag1S2O3 2 4  3.8  109 M

4.29  104
3Ag1S2O3 2  4 12.862



We can calculate [Ag] from K1:
7.4  108  K1 

3Ag1S2O3 2  4

3Ag 4 3S2O3 4
3 Ag 4  1.8  10 18 M


2



3.8  109
3Ag 4 12.862



These results show that [Ag(S2O3)23]  [Ag(S2O3)]  [Ag]

734

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
Thus the assumption is valid that essentially all the original Ag is converted to
Ag(S2O3)23 at equilibrium.
See Exercises 15.109 and 15.110.

Complex Ions and Solubility
Often ionic solids that are very nearly water-insoluble must be dissolved somehow in aqueous solutions. For example, when the various qualitative analysis groups are precipitated
out, the precipitates must be redissolved to separate the ions within each group. Consider
a solution of cations that contains Ag, Pb2, and Hg22, among others. When dilute aqueous HCl is added to this solution, the Group I ions will form the insoluble chlorides AgCl,
PbCl2, and Hg2Cl2. Once this mixed precipitate is separated from the solution, it must be
redissolved to identify the cations individually. How can this be done? We know that some
solids are more soluble in acidic than in neutral solutions. What about chloride salts? For
example, can AgCl be dissolved by using a strong acid? The answer is no, because Cl
ions have virtually no afﬁnity for H ions in aqueous solution. The position of the dissolution equilibrium
AgCl1s2 ∆ Ag 1aq2  Cl 1aq2
is not affected by the presence of H.
How can we pull the dissolution equilibrium to the right, even though Cl is an extremely weak base? The key is to lower the concentration of Ag in solution by forming
complex ions. For example, Ag reacts with excess NH3 to form the stable complex ion
Ag(NH3)2. As a result, AgCl is quite soluble in concentrated ammonia solutions. The relevant reactions are
AgCl1s2 ∆ Ag  Cl
Ag  NH3 ∆ Ag1NH3 2 
Ag1NH3 2   NH3 ∆ Ag1NH3 2 2


(top) Aqueous ammonia is added to silver
chloride (white). (bottom) Silver chloride,
insoluble in water, dissolves to form
Ag(NH3)2(aq) and Cl(aq).

Ksp  1.6  1010
K1  2.1  103
K2  8.2  103

The Ag ion produced by dissolving solid AgCl combines with NH3 to form Ag(NH3)2,
which causes more AgCl to dissolve, until the point at which
3Ag 4 3Cl 4  Ksp  1.6  1010
Here [Ag] refers only to the Ag ion that is present as a separate species in solution. It
is not the total silver content of the solution, which is
3 Ag4 total dissolved  3Ag 4  3Ag1NH3 2  4  3Ag1NH3 2 2 4
For reasons discussed in the previous section, virtually all the Ag from the dissolved
AgCl ends up in the complex ion Ag(NH3)2. Thus we can represent the dissolving of
solid AgCl in excess NH3 by the equation
AgCl1s2  2NH3 1aq2 ∆ Ag1NH3 2 2 1aq2  Cl 1aq2

When reactions are added, the
equilibrium constant for the overall
process is the product of the constants
for the individual reactions.

Since this equation is the sum of the three stepwise reactions given above, the equilibrium
constant for the reaction is the product of the constants for the three reactions. (Demonstrate this to yourself by multiplying together the three expressions for Ksp, K1, and K2.)
The equilibrium expression is
K

3Ag1NH3 2 2 4 3Cl 4

3NH3 4 2
 Ksp  K1  K2  11.6  1010 212.1  103 218.2  103 2  2.8  103

15.8 Equilibria Involving Complex Ions

735

Using this expression, we will now calculate the solubility of solid AgCl in a 10.0 M
NH3 solution. If we let x be the solubility (in mol/L) of AgCl in the solution, we can then
write the following expressions for the equilibrium concentrations of the pertinent species:
x mol/L of AgCl dissolves to
3Cl 4  x m888888
88888 produce x mol/L of Cl and
8

8
8
8
8
3Ag1NH3 2 2 4  x m888888
x mol/L of Ag(NH3)2

3NH3 4  10.0  2x

Formation of x mol/L of Ag(NH3)2
requires 2x mol/L of NH3, since
— each complex ion contains
two NH3 ligands

Substituting these concentrations into the equilibrium expression gives
K  2.8  103 

3Ag1NH3 2 2 4 3 Cl 4
3NH3 4 2



1x21x2

110.0  2x2 2



x2
110.0  2x2 2

No approximations are necessary here. Taking the square root of both sides of the equation gives
x
10.0  2x
x  0.48 mol/L  solubility of AgCl1s2 in 10.0 M NH3

22.8  103 

Thus the solubility of AgCl in 10.0 M NH3 is much greater than its solubility in pure water, which is
1Ksp  1.3  105 mol/L
In this chapter we have considered two strategies for dissolving a water-insoluble
ionic solid. If the anion of the solid is a good base, the solubility is greatly increased by
acidifying the solution. In cases where the anion is not sufﬁciently basic, the ionic solid
often can be dissolved in a solution containing a ligand that forms stable complex ions
with its cation.
Sometimes solids are so insoluble that combinations of reactions are needed to dissolve them. For example, to dissolve the extremely insoluble HgS (Ksp  1054), it is necessary to use a mixture of concentrated HCl and concentrated HNO3, called aqua regia.
The H ions in the aqua regia react with the S2 ions to form H2S, and Cl reacts with
Hg2 to form various complex ions, including HgCl42. In addition, NO3 oxidizes S2
to elemental sulfur. These processes lower the concentrations of Hg2 and S2 and thus
promote the solubility of HgS.
Since the solubility of many salts increases with temperature, simple heating is sometimes enough to make a salt sufﬁciently soluble. For example, earlier in this section we
considered the mixed chloride precipitates of the Group I ions—PbCl2, AgCl, and Hg2Cl2.
The effect of temperature on the solubility of PbCl2 is such that we can precipitate PbCl2
with cold aqueous HCl and then redissolve it by heating the solution to near boiling. The
silver and mercury(I) chlorides remain precipitated, since they are not signiﬁcantly soluble in hot water. However, solid AgCl can be dissolved using aqueous ammonia. The solid
Hg2Cl2 reacts with NH3 to form a mixture of elemental mercury and HgNH2Cl:
Hg2Cl2 1s2  2NH3 1aq2 ¡ HgNH2Cl1s2  Hg1l2  NH4 1aq2  Cl 1aq2
White

Black

The mixed precipitate appears gray. This is an oxidation–reduction reaction in which one
mercury(I) ion in Hg2Cl2 is oxidized to Hg2 in HgNH2Cl and the other mercury(I) ion
is reduced to Hg, or elemental mercury.
The treatment of the Group I ions is summarized in Fig. 15.13. Note that the presence of Pb2 is conﬁrmed by adding CrO42, which forms bright yellow lead(II) chromate

736

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

Solution of
Ag+, Hg22+, Pb2+
Add cold HCl (aq)

Precipitate of
AgCl(s), Hg2Cl2(s), PbCl2(s)
Heat

Solution of
Pb2+

Precipitate of
AgCl(s), Hg2Cl2(s)

Add CrO42–

Precipitate of
PbCrO4(s) (yellow)

Add NH3 (aq)

Solution of
Ag(NH3)2+, Cl–

Precipitate of
Hg(l) (black),
HgNH2Cl(s) (white)

Add H+

Precipitate of
AgCl(s) (white)

FIGURE 15.13
The separation of the Group I ions in the
classic scheme of qualitative analysis.

(PbCrO4). Also note that H added to a solution containing Ag(NH3)2 reacts with the
NH3 to form NH4, destroying the Ag(NH3)2 complex. Silver chloride then re-forms:
2H 1aq2  Ag1NH3 2 2 1aq2  Cl 1aq2 ¡ 2NH4 1aq2  AgCl1s2

Note that the qualitative analysis of cations by selective precipitation involves all the types
of reactions we have discussed and represents an excellent application of the principles
of chemical equilibrium.

Key Terms
Section 15.1
common ion
common ion effect

Section 15.2
buffered solution
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation

Section 15.3
buffering capacity

Section 15.4
pH curve (titration curve)
millimole (mmol)
equivalence point (stoichiometric point)

For Review
Buffered solutions
䊉 Contains a weak acid (HA) and its salt (NaA) or a weak base (B) and its salt (BHCl)


䊉 Resists a change in its pH when H or OH is added

䊉 For a buffered solution containing HA and A
• The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation is useful:
pH  pKa  log a

3A 4
b
3HA4

• The capacity of the buffered solution depends on the amounts of HA and A
present

For Review
Section 15.5

[A ]
ratio is close to 1
[HA]
• Buffering works because the amounts of HA (which reacts with added OH)
[A ]
and A (which reacts with added H) are large enough that the
ratio
[HA]
does not change signiﬁcantly when strong acids or bases are added

acid–base indicator
phenolphthalein

• The most efﬁcient buffering occurs when the

Section 15.6
solubility product constant (solubility
product)

Section 15.7
ion product
selective precipitation
qualitative analysis

Section 15.8
complex ion
formation (stability) constants

737

Acid–base titrations
The progress of a titration is represented by plotting the pH of the solution versus
the volume of added titrant; the resulting graph is called a pH curve or titration
curve
䊉 Strong acid–strong base titrations show a sharp change in pH near the equivalence point
䊉 The shape of the pH curve for a strong base–strong acid titration is quite different before the equivalence point from the shape of the pH curve for a strong
base–weak acid titration
• The strong base–weak acid pH curve shows the effects of buffering before the
equivalence point
• For a strong base–weak acid titration, the pH is greater than 7 at the equivalence point because of the basic properties of A
䊉 Indicators are sometimes used to mark the equivalence point of an acid–base titration
• The end point is where the indicator changes color
• The goal is to have the end point and the equivalence point be as close as possible
䊉

Solids dissolving in water
For a slightly soluble salt, an equilibrium is set up between the excess solid (MX)
and the ions in solution

䊉

MX1s2 ∆ M 1aq2  X 1aq2
䊉

The corresponding constant is called Ksp:

Ksp  3M 4 3X 4

䊉

• The solubility of MX(s) is decreased by the presence from another source of
either M or X; this is called the common ion effect
Predicting whether precipitation will occur when two solutions are mixed involves calculating Q for the initial concentrations
• If Q 7 Ksp, precipitation occurs
• If Q  Ksp, no precipitation occurs

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is meant by the presence of a common ion? How does the presence of a
common ion affect an equilibrium such as
HNO2 1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  NO2 1aq2
What is an acid–base solution called that contains a common ion?
2. Deﬁne a buffer solution. What makes up a buffer solution? How do buffers absorb added H or OH with little pH change?
Is it necessary that the concentrations of the weak acid and the weak base
in a buffered solution be equal? Explain. What is the pH of a buffer when the
weak acid and conjugate base concentrations are equal?
A buffer generally contains a weak acid and its weak conjugate base, or a
weak base and its weak conjugate acid, in water. You can solve for the pH by
setting up the equilibrium problem using the Ka reaction of the weak acid or the

738

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

Kb reaction of the conjugate base. Both reactions give the same answer for the
pH of the solution. Explain.
A third method that can be used to solve for the pH of a buffer solution is
the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation. What is the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation? What assumptions are made when using this equation?
3. One of the most challenging parts of solving acid–base problems is writing out
the correct reaction. When a strong acid or a strong base is added to solutions,
they are great at what they do and we always react them ﬁrst. If a strong acid is
added to a buffer, what reacts with the H from the strong acid and what are
the products? If a strong base is added to a buffer, what reacts with the OH
from the strong base and what are the products? Problems involving the reaction of a strong acid or strong base are assumed to be stoichiometry problems
and not equilibrium problems. What is assumed when a strong acid or strong
base reacts to make it a stoichiometry problem?
A good buffer generally contains relatively equal concentrations of weak
acid and conjugate base. If you wanted to buffer a solution at pH  4.00 or
pH  10.00, how would you decide which weak acid–conjugate base or weak
base–conjugate acid pair to use? The second characteristic of a good buffer is
good buffering capacity. What is the capacity of a buffer? How do the following
buffers differ in capacity? How do they differ in pH?
0.01 M acetic acid 0.01 M sodium acetate
0.1 M acetic acid 0.1 M sodium acetate
1.0 M acetic acid 1.0 M sodium acetate
4. Draw the general titration curve for a strong acid titrated by a strong base. At the
various points in the titration, list the major species present before any reaction
takes place and the major species present after any reaction takes place. What reaction takes place in a strong acid–strong base titration? How do you calculate
the pH at the various points along the curve? What is the pH at the equivalence
point for a strong acid–strong base titration? Why? Answer the same questions
for a strong base–strong acid titration. Compare and contrast a strong acid–strong
base titration versus a strong base–strong acid titration.
5. Sketch the titration curve for a weak acid titrated by a strong base. When performing calculations concerning weak acid–strong base titrations, the general
two-step procedure is to solve a stoichiometry problem ﬁrst, then to solve an
equilibrium problem to determine the pH. What reaction takes place in the stoichiometry part of the problem? What is assumed about this reaction?
At the various points in your titration curve, list the major species present
after the strong base (NaOH, for example) reacts to completion with the weak
acid, HA. What equilibrium problem would you solve at the various points in
your titration curve to calculate the pH? Why is pH 7 7.0 at the equivalence
point of a weak acid–strong base titration? Does the pH at the halfway point to
equivalence have to be less than 7.0? What does the pH at the halfway point
equal? Compare and contrast the titration curves for a strong acid–strong base
titration and a weak acid–strong base titration.
6. Sketch the titration curve for a weak base titrated by a strong acid. Weak
base–strong acid titration problems also follow a two-step procedure. What reaction takes place in the stoichiometry part of the problem? What is assumed
about this reaction? At the various points in your titration curve, list the major
species present after the strong acid (HNO3, for example) reacts to completion
with the weak base, B. What equilibrium problem would you solve at the various points in your titration curve to calculate the pH? Why is pH 6 7.0 at the
equivalence point of a weak base–strong acid titration? If pH  6.0 at the

Active Learning Questions

7.

8.

9.

10.

739

halfway point to equivalence, what is the Kb value for the weak base titrated?
Compare and contrast the titration curves for a strong base–strong acid titration
and a weak base–strong acid titration.
What is an acid–base indicator? Deﬁne the equivalence (stoichiometric) point and
the end point of a titration. Why should you choose an indicator so that the two
points coincide? Do the pH values of the two points have to be within 0.01 pH
unit of each other? Explain. Why does an indicator change from its acid color to
its base color over a range of pH values? In general, when do color changes start
to occur for indicators? Can the indicator thymol blue contain only a single
¬ CO2H group and no other acidic or basic functional group? Explain.
To what reaction does the solubility product constant, Ksp, refer? Table 15.4
lists Ksp values for several ionic solids. For any of these ionic compounds, you
should be able to calculate the solubility. What is the solubility of a salt, and
what procedures do you follow to calculate the solubility of a salt? How would
you calculate the Ksp value for a salt given the solubility?
Under what circumstances can you compare the relative solubilities of two
salts directly by comparing the values of their solubility products? When can
relative solubilities not be compared based on Ksp values? What is a common
ion and how does its presence affect the solubility? List some salts whose solubility increases as the pH becomes more acidic. What is true about the anions
in these salts? List some salts whose solubility remains unaffected by the solution pH. What is true about the anions in these salts?
What is the difference between the ion product, Q, and the solubility product,
Ksp? What happens when Q 7 Ksp? Q 6 Ksp? Q  Ksp? Mixtures of metal ions
in aqueous solution can sometimes be separated by selective precipitation. What
is selective precipitation? If a solution contained 0.10 M Mg2, 0.10 M Ca2,
and 0.10 M Ba2, how could addition of NaF be used to separate the cations
out of solution—that is, what would precipitate ﬁrst, then second, then third?
How could addition of K3PO4 be used to separate out the cations in a solution
that 1.0 M Ag, 1.0 M Pb2, and 1.0 M Sr2?
What is a complex ion? The stepwise formation constants for the complex ion
Cu(NH3)42 are K1  1  103, K2  1  104, K3  1  103, and K4  1  103.
Write the reactions that refer to each of these formation constants. Given that the
values of the formation constants are large, what can you deduce about the equilibrium concentration of Cu(NH3)42 versus the equilibrium concentration of Cu2?
When 5 M ammonia is added to a solution containing Cu(OH)2(s), the precipitate
will eventually dissolve in solution. Why? If 5 M HNO3 is then added, the
Cu(OH)2 precipitate re-forms. Why? In general, what effect does the ability of a
cation to form a complex ion have on the solubility of salts containing that cation?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. What are the major species in solution after NaHSO4 is dissolved
in water? What happens to the pH of the solution as more
NaHSO4 is added? Why? Would the results vary if baking soda
(NaHCO3) were used instead?

2. A friend asks the following: “Consider a buffered solution made
up of the weak acid HA and its salt NaA. If a strong base like
NaOH is added, the HA reacts with the OH to form A. Thus
the amount of acid (HA) is decreased, and the amount of base
(A) is increased. Analogously, adding HCl to the buffered solution forms more of the acid (HA) by reacting with the base
(A). Thus how can we claim that a buffered solution resists
changes in the pH of the solution?” How would you explain
buffering to this friend?
3. Mixing together solutions of acetic acid and sodium hydroxide
can make a buffered solution. Explain. How does the amount of

740

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria
each solution added change the effectiveness of the buffer?
Would a buffer solution made by mixing HCl and NaOH be
effective? Explain.
Sketch two pH curves, one for the titration of a weak acid with
a strong base and one for a strong acid with a strong base. How
are they similar? How are they different? Account for the similarities and the differences.
Sketch a pH curve for the titration of a weak acid (HA) with a
strong base (NaOH). List the major species and explain how you
would go about calculating the pH of the solution at various
points, including the halfway point and the equivalence point.
Devise as many ways as you can to experimentally determine
the Ksp value of a solid. Explain why each of these would work.
You are browsing through the Handbook of Hypothetical Chemistry when you come across a solid that is reported to have a Ksp
value of zero in water at 25°C. What does this mean?
A friend tells you: “The constant Ksp of a salt is called the solubility product constant and is calculated from the concentrations of ions in the solution. Thus, if salt A dissolves to a greater
extent than salt B, salt A must have a higher Ksp than salt B.”
Do you agree with your friend? Explain.
Explain the following phenomenon: You have a test tube with
about 20 mL of silver nitrate solution. Upon adding a few
drops of sodium chromate solution, you notice a red solid
forming in a relatively clear solution. Upon adding a few drops
of a sodium chloride solution to the same test tube, you notice a white solid and a pale yellow solution. Use the Ksp values
in the book to support your explanation, and include the
balanced reactions.
What happens to the Ksp value of a solid as the temperature of
the solution changes? Consider both increasing and decreasing
temperatures, and explain your answer.
Which is more likely to dissolve in an acidic solution, silver sulﬁde or silver chloride? Why?
You have two salts, AgX and AgY, with very similar Ksp values.
You know that the Ka value for HX is much greater than the Ka
value for HY. Which salt is more soluble in an acidic solution?
Explain.

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
13. The common ion effect for weak acids is to signiﬁcantly decrease the dissociation of the acid in water. The common ion
effect for ionic solids (salts) is to signiﬁcantly decrease the
solubility of the ionic compound in water. Explain both of
these common ion effects.
14. Consider a buffer solution where [weak acid]  [conjugate base].
How is the pH of the solution related to the pKa value of the
weak acid? If [conjugate base]  [weak acid], how is pH related
to pKa?
15. A best buffer has about equal quantities of weak acid and conjugate base present as well as having a large concentration of
each species present. Explain.

16. Consider the following four titrations.
i. 100.0 mL of 0.10 M HCl titrated by 0.10 M NaOH
ii. 100.0 mL of 0.10 M NaOH titrated by 0.10 M HCl
iii. 100.0 mL of 0.10 M CH3NH2 titrated by 0.10 M HCl
iv. 100.0 mL of 0.10 M HF titrated by 0.10 M NaOH
Rank the titrations in order of:
a. increasing volume of titrant added to reach the equivalence
point.
b. increasing pH initially before any titrant has been added.
c. increasing pH at the halfway point in equivalence.
d. increasing pH at the equivalence point.
How would the rankings change if C5H5N replaced CH3NH2 and
if HOC6H5 replaced HF?
17. Figure 15.4 shows the pH curves for the titrations of six different acids by NaOH. Make a similar plot for the titration of three
different bases by 0.10 M HCl. Assume 50.0 mL of 0.20 M of
the bases and assume the three bases are a strong base (KOH),
a weak base with Kb  1  105, and another weak base with
Kb  1  1010.
18. Acid–base indicators mark the end point of titrations by “magically” turning a different color. Explain the “magic” behind
acid–base indicators.
19. The salts in Table 15.4, with the possible exception of the hydroxide salts, have one of the following mathematical relationships between the Ksp value and the molar solubility, s.
i. Ksp  s2
iii. Ksp  27s4
3
ii. Ksp  4s
iv. Ksp  108s5
For each mathematical relationship, give an example of a salt in
Table 15.4 that exhibits that relationship.
20. List some ways one can increase the solubility of a salt in water.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Buffers
21. A certain buffer is made by dissolving NaHCO3 and Na2CO3 in
some water. Write equations to show how this buffer neutralizes
added H and OH.
22. A buffer is prepared by dissolving HONH2 and HONH3NO3 in
some water. Write equations to show how this buffer neutralizes
added H and OH.
23. Calculate the pH of each of the following solutions.
a. 0.100 M propanoic acid (HC3H5O2, Ka  1.3  105 )
b. 0.100 M sodium propanoate (NaC3H5O2)
c. pure H2O
d. a mixture containing 0.100 M HC3H5O2 and 0.100 M
NaC3H5O2
24. Calculate the pH of each of the following solutions.
a. 0.100 M HONH2 (Kb  1.1  108 )
b. 0.100 M HONH3Cl
c. pure H2O
d. a mixture containing 0.100 M HONH2 and 0.100 M HONH3Cl
25. Compare the percent dissociation of the acid in Exercise 23a
with the percent dissociation of the acid in Exercise 23d. Explain
the large difference in percent dissociation of the acid.

Exercises
26. Compare the percent ionization of the base in Exercise 24a with
the percent ionization of the base in Exercise 24d. Explain any
differences.
27. Calculate the pH after 0.020 mol HCl is added to 1.00 L of each
of the four solutions in Exercise 23.
28. Calculate the pH after 0.020 mol HCl is added to 1.00 L of each
of the four solutions in Exercise 24.
29. Calculate the pH after 0.020 mol NaOH is added to 1.00 L of
each of the four solutions in Exercise 23.
30. Calculate the pH after 0.020 mol NaOH is added to 1.00 L of
each of the solutions in Exercise 24.
31. Which of the solutions in Exercise 23 shows the least change in
pH upon the addition of acid or base? Explain.
32. Which of the solutions in Exercise 24 is a buffered solution?
33. Calculate the pH of a solution that is 1.00 M HNO2 and 1.00 M
NaNO2.
34. Calculate the pH of a solution that is 0.60 M HF and 1.00 M KF.
35. Calculate the pH after 0.10 mol of NaOH is added to 1.00 L of
the solution in Exercise 33, and calculate the pH after 0.20 mol
of HCl is added to 1.00 L of the solution in Exercise 33.
36. Calculate the pH after 0.10 mol of NaOH is added to 1.00 L of
the solution in Exercise 34, and calculate the pH after 0.20 mol
of HCl is added to 1.00 L of the solution in Exercise 34.
37. Calculate the pH of a buffer solution prepared by dissolving
21.46 g of benzoic acid (HC7H5O2) and 37.68 g of sodium benzoate in 200.0 mL of solution.
38. A buffered solution is made by adding 50.0 g NH4Cl to 1.00 L
of a 0.75 M solution of NH3. Calculate the pH of the ﬁnal solution. (Assume no volume change.)
39. Calculate the pH after 0.010 mol gaseous HCl is added to 250.0
mL of each of the following buffered solutions.
a. 0.050 M NH3 0.15 M NH4Cl
b. 0.50 M NH3 1.50 M NH4Cl
Do the two original buffered solutions differ in their pH or their
capacity? What advantage is there in having a buffer with a
greater capacity?
40. An aqueous solution contains dissolved C6H5NH3Cl and C6H5NH2.
The concentration of C6H5NH2 is 0.50 M and pH is 4.20.
a. Calculate the concentration of C6H5NH3 in this buffer solution.
b. Calculate the pH after 4.0 g of NaOH(s) is added to 1.0 L of
this solution. (Neglect any volume change.)

44. a. Carbonate buffers are important in regulating the pH of blood
at 7.40. What is the concentration ratio of CO2 (usually written H2CO3) to HCO3 in blood at pH  7.40?
H2CO3 1aq2 ∆ HCO3 1aq2  H 1aq2

Ka  4.3  107

b. Phosphate buffers are important in regulating the pH of intracellular ﬂuids at pH values generally between 7.1 and 7.2.
What is the concentration ratio of H2PO4 to HPO42 in intracellular ﬂuid at pH  7.15?
H2PO4 1aq2 ∆ HPO42 1aq2  H 1aq2

Ka  6.2  108

c. Why is a buffer composed of H3PO4 and H2PO4 ineffective
in buffering the pH of intracellular ﬂuid?
H3PO4 1aq2 ∆ H2PO4 1aq2  H 1aq2

Ka  7.5  103

45. Consider the acids in Table 14.2. Which acid would be the best
choice for preparing a pH  7.00 buffer? Explain how to make
1.0 L of this buffer.
46. Consider the bases in Table 14.3. Which base would be the best
choice for preparing a pH  5.00 buffer? Explain how to make
1.0 L of this buffer.
47. Which of the following mixtures would result in buffered solutions when 1.0 L of each of the two solutions are mixed?
a. 0.1 M KOH and 0.1 M CH3NH3Cl
b. 0.1 M KOH and 0.2 M CH3NH2
c. 0.2 M KOH and 0.1 M CH3NH3Cl
d. 0.1 M KOH and 0.2 M CH3NH3Cl
48. Which of the following mixtures would result in a buffered solution when 1.0 L of each of the two solutions are mixed?
a. 0.2 M HNO3 and 0.4 M NaNO3
b. 0.2 M HNO3 and 0.4 M HF
c. 0.2 M HNO3 and 0.4 M NaF
d. 0.2 M HNO3 and 0.4 M NaOH
49. How many moles of NaOH must be added to 1.0 L of 2.0 M
HC2H3O2 to produce a solution buffered at each pH?
a. pH  pKa
b. pH  4.00
c. pH  5.00
50. Calculate the number of moles of HCl(g) that must be added
to 1.0 L of 1.0 M NaC2H3O2 to produce a solution buffered at
each pH.
a. pH  pKa
b. pH  4.20
c. pH  5.00

Acid–Base Titrations
51. Consider the titration of a generic weak acid HA with a strong
base that gives the following titration curve:

pH

41. Calculate the mass of sodium acetate that must be added to
500.0 mL of 0.200 M acetic acid to form a pH  5.00 buffer
solution.
42. What volumes of 0.50 M HNO2 and 0.50 M NaNO2 must be
mixed to prepare 1.00 L of a solution buffered at pH  3.55?
43. Consider a solution that contains both C5H5N and C5H5NHNO3.
Calculate the ratio [C5H5N] [C5H5NH] if the solution has the
following pH values.
a. pH  4.50
c. pH  5.23
b. pH  5.00
d. pH  5.50

741

5

10

15

20

25

742

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

On the curve, indicate the points that correspond to the following:
a. the stoichiometric (equivalence) point
b. the region with maximum buffering
c. pH  pKa
d. pH depends only on [HA]
e. pH depends only on [A ]
f. pH depends only on the amount of excess strong base added
52. Sketch the titration curve for the titration of a generic weak base
B with a strong acid. The titration reaction is
B  H ∆ BH
On this curve, indicate the points that correspond to the following:
a. the stoichiometric (equivalence) point
b. the region with maximum buffering
c. pH  pKa
d. pH depends only on [B]
e. pH depends only on [BH ]
f. pH depends only on the amount of excess strong acid added
53. Consider the titration of 40.0 mL of 0.200 M HClO4 by 0.100 M
KOH. Calculate the pH of the resulting solution after the following volumes of KOH have been added.
a. 0.0 mL
d. 80.0 mL
b. 10.0 mL
e. 100.0 mL
c. 40.0 mL
54. Consider the titration of 80.0 mL of 0.100 M Ba(OH)2 by 0.400 M
HCl. Calculate the pH of the resulting solution after the following
volumes of HCl have been added.
a. 0.0 mL
d. 40.0 mL
b. 20.0 mL
e. 80.0 mL
c. 30.0 mL
55. Consider the titration of 100.0 mL of 0.200 M acetic acid (Ka 
1.8  105 ) by 0.100 M KOH. Calculate the pH of the resulting solution after the following volumes of KOH have been
added.
a. 0.0 mL
d. 150.0 mL
b. 50.0 mL
e. 200.0 mL
c. 100.0 mL
f. 250.0 mL
56. Consider the titration of 100.0 mL of 0.100 M H2NNH2
(Kb  3.0  106 ) by 0.200 M HNO3. Calculate the pH of the
resulting solution after the following volumes of HNO3 have
been added.
a. 0.0 mL
d. 40.0 mL
b. 20.0 mL
e. 50.0 mL
c. 25.0 mL
f. 100.0 mL
57. A 25.0-mL sample of 0.100 M lactic acid (HC3H5O3, pKa  3.86)
is titrated with 0.100 M NaOH solution. Calculate the pH after
the addition of 0.0 mL, 4.0 mL, 8.0 mL, 12.5 mL, 20.0 mL,
24.0 mL, 24.5 mL, 24.9 mL, 25.0 mL, 25.1 mL, 26.0 mL, 28.0
mL, and 30.0 mL of the NaOH. Plot the results of your calculations as pH versus milliliters of NaOH added.
58. Repeat the procedure in Exercise 57, but for the titration of
25.0 mL of 0.100 M propanoic acid (HC3H5O2, Ka  1.3 
105) with 0.100 M NaOH.
59. Repeat the procedure in Exercise 57, but for the titration of 25.0
mL of 0.100 M NH3 (Kb  1.8  105 ) with 0.100 M HCl.

60. Repeat the procedure in Exercise 57, but for the titration of 25.0
mL of 0.100 M pyridine with 0.100 M hydrochloric acid (Kb for
pyridine is 1.7  109). Do not do the points at 24.9 and 25.1 mL.
61. Calculate the pH at the halfway point and at the equivalence
point for each of the following titrations.
a. 100.0 mL of 0.10 M HC7H5O2 (Ka  6.4  105 ) titrated by
0.10 M NaOH
b. 100.0 mL of 0.10 M C2H5NH2 (Kb  5.6  104 ) titrated by
0.20 M HNO3
c. 100.0 mL of 0.50 M HCl titrated by 0.25 M NaOH
62. In the titration of 50.0 mL of 1.0 M methylamine, CH3NH2
(Kb  4.4  104), with 0.50 M HCl, calculate the pH under the
following conditions.
a. after 50.0 mL of 0.50 M HCl has been added
b. at the stoichiometric point
63. You have 75.0 mL of 0.10 M HA. After adding 30.0 mL of 0.10 M
NaOH, the pH is 5.50. What is the Ka value of HA?
64. A sample of an ionic compound NaA, where A is the anion of a
weak acid, was dissolved in enough water to make 100.0 mL of
solution and was then titrated with 0.100 M HCl. After 500.0 mL
of HCl was added, the pH was measured and found to be 5.00.
The experimenter found that 1.00 L of 0.100 M HCl was required
to reach the stoichiometric point of the titration.
a. What is the Kb value for A?
b. Calculate the pH of the solution at the stoichiometric point
of the titration.

Indicators
65. Two drops of indicator HIn (Ka  1.0  109), where HIn is
yellow and In is blue, are placed in 100.0 mL of 0.10 M HCl.
a. What color is the solution initially?
b. The solution is titrated with 0.10 M NaOH. At what pH will
the color change (yellow to greenish yellow) occur?
c. What color will the solution be after 200.0 mL of NaOH has
been added?
66. Methyl red has the following structure:

It undergoes a color change from red to yellow as a solution gets
more basic. Calculate an approximate pH range for which methyl
red is useful. What is the color change and the pH at the color
change when a weak acid is titrated with a strong base using
methyl red as an indicator? What is the color change and the pH
at the color change when a weak base is titrated with a strong
acid using methyl red as an indicator? For which of these two
types of titrations is methyl red a possible indicator?
67. Potassium hydrogen phthalate, known as KHP (molar mass 
204.22 g mol), can be obtained in high purity and is used to
determine the concentration of solutions of strong bases by the
reaction
HP 1aq2  OH 1aq2 ¡ H2O1l2  P2 1aq2

Exercises
If a typical titration experiment begins with approximately 0.5 g
of KHP and has a ﬁnal volume of about 100 mL, what is an
appropriate indicator to use? The pKa for HP is 5.51.
68. A certain indicator HIn has a pKa of 3.00 and a color change becomes visible when 7.00% of the indicator has been converted
to In. At what pH is this color change visible?
69. Which of the indicators in Fig. 15.8 could be used for the
titrations in Exercises 53 and 55?
70. Which of the indicators in Fig. 15.8 could be used for the titrations in Exercises 54 and 56?
71. Which of the indicators in Fig. 15.8 could be used for the
titrations in Exercises 57 and 59?
72. Which of the indicators in Fig. 15.8 could be used for the titrations in Exercises 58 and 60?
73. Estimate the pH of a solution in which bromcresol green is blue
and thymol blue is yellow. (See Fig. 15.8.)
74. A solution has a pH of 7.0. What would be the color of the solution if each of the following indicators were added? (See Fig. 15.8.)
a. thymol blue
c. methyl red
b. bromthymol blue
d. crystal violet

Solubility Equilibria
75. Write balanced equations for the dissolution reactions and the
corresponding solubility product expressions for each of the following solids.
a. AgC2H3O2
b. Al(OH)3
c. Ca3(PO4)2
76. Write balanced equations for the dissolution reactions and the
corresponding solubility product expressions for each of the following solids.
a. Ag2CO3
b. Ce(IO3)3
c. BaF2
77. Use the following data to calculate the Ksp value for each solid.
a. The solubility of CaC2O4 is 6.1  103 g/L.
b. The solubility of BiI3 is 1.32  105 mol/L.
78. Use the following data to calculate the Ksp value for each solid.
a. The solubility of Pb3(PO4)2 is 6.2  1012 mol/L.
b. The solubility of Li2CO3 is 7.4  102 mol/L.
79. The concentration of Pb2 in a solution saturated with PbBr2(s)
is 2.14  102 M. Calculate Ksp for PbBr2.
80. The concentration of Ag in a solution saturated with Ag2C2O4(s)
is 2.2  104 M. Calculate Ksp for Ag2C2O4.
81. Calculate the solubility of each of the following compounds in
moles per liter. Ignore any acid–base properties.
a. Ag3PO4, Ksp  1.8  1018
b. CaCO3, Ksp  8.7  109
c. Hg2Cl2, Ksp  1.1  1018 (Hg22 is the cation in solution.)
82. Calculate the solubility of each of the following compounds in
moles per liter. Ignore any acid–base properties.
a. PbI2, Ksp  1.4  108
b. CdCO3, Ksp  5.2  1012
c. Sr3(PO4)2, Ksp  1  1031
83. The solubility of the ionic compound M2X3, having a molar mass
of 288 g/mol, is 3.60  107 g/L. Calculate the Ksp of the
compound.

743

84. A solution contains 0.018 mol each of I, Br, and Cl. When
the solution is mixed with 200. mL of 0.24 M AgNO3, what mass
of AgCl(s) precipitates out, and what is the [Ag]? Assume no
volume change.
AgI, Ksp  1.5  1016
AgBr, Ksp  5.0  1013
AgCl, Ksp  1.6  1010
85. Calculate the molar solubility of Co(OH)3, Ksp  2.5  1043.
86. Calculate the molar solubility of Cd(OH)2, Ksp  5.9  1011.
87. For each of the following pairs of solids, determine which solid
has the smallest molar solubility.
a. CaF2(s), Ksp  4.0  1011, or BaF2(s), Ksp  2.4  105
b. Ca3(PO4)2(s), Ksp  1.3  1032, or FePO4(s), Ksp  1.0  1022
88. For each of the following pairs of solids, determine which solid
has the smallest molar solubility.
a. FeC2O4, Ksp  2.1  107, or Cu(IO4 ) 2, Ksp  1.4  107
b. Ag2CO3, Ksp  8.1  1012, or Mn(OH) 2, Ksp  2  1013
89. Calculate the solubility (in moles per liter) of Fe(OH)3 (Ksp 
4  1038) in each of the following.
a. water
b. a solution buffered at pH  5.0
c. a solution buffered at pH  11.0
90. The Ksp for silver sulfate (Ag2SO4) is 1.2  105. Calculate the
solubility of silver sulfate in each of the following.
a. water
b. 0.10 M AgNO3
c. 0.20 M K2SO4
91. Calculate the solubility of solid Ca3(PO4)2 (Ksp  1.3  1032)
in a 0.20 M Na3PO4 solution.
92. The solubility of Ce(IO3)3 in a 0.20 M KIO3 solution is
4.4  108 mol/L. Calculate Ksp for Ce(IO3)3.
93. What mass of ZnS (Ksp  2.5  1022 ) will dissolve in 300.0 mL
of 0.050 M Zn(NO3 ) 2? Ignore the basic properties of S2.
94. The concentration of Mg2 in seawater is 0.052 M. At what pH
will 99% of the Mg2 be precipitated as the hydroxide salt? [Ksp
for Mg(OH) 2  8.9  1012.]
95. Which of the substances in Exercises 81 and 82 show increased
solubility as the pH of the solution becomes more acidic?
Write equations for the reactions that occur to increase the
solubility.
96. For which salt in each of the following groups will the solubility depend on pH?
a. AgF, AgCl, AgBr
c. Sr(NO3)2, Sr(NO2)2
b. Pb(OH)2, PbCl2
d. Ni(NO3)2, Ni(CN)2
97. Will a precipitate form when 75.0 mL of 0.020 M BaCl2 and
125 mL of 0.040 M Na2SO4 are mixed together?
98. Will a precipitate form when 100.0 mL of 4.0  104 M
Mg(NO3)2 is added to 100.0 mL of 2.0  104 M NaOH?
99. Calculate the ﬁnal concentrations of K(aq), C2O42(aq),
Ba2(aq), and Br(aq) in a solution prepared by adding 0.100 L
of 0.200 M K2C2O4 to 0.150 L of 0.250 M BaBr2. (For BaC2O4,
Ksp  2.3  108.)

744

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

100. A solution is prepared by mixing 50.0 mL of 0.10 M Pb(NO3)2
with 50.0 mL of 1.0 M KCl. Calculate the concentrations of
Pb2 and Cl at equilibrium. Ksp for PbCl2(s) is 1.6  105.
5

101. A solution contains 1.0  10 M Na3PO4. What is the minimum concentration of AgNO3 that would cause precipitation of
solid Ag3PO4 (Ksp  1.8  1018)?
102. A solution contains 0.25 M Ni(NO3)2 and 0.25 M Cu(NO3)2. Can
the metal ions be separated by slowly adding Na2CO3? Assume
that for successful separation 99% of the metal ion must be precipitated before the other metal ion begins to precipitate, and assume no volume change on addition of Na2CO3.

for the stepwise formation of each of the folions.

for the stepwise formation of each of the folions.

105. Given the following data,
Mn2 1aq2  C2O42 1aq2 ∆ MnC2O4 1aq2

K1  7.9  103

MnC2O4 1aq2  C2O4 1aq2 ∆ Mn1C2O4 2 2 1aq2
K2  7.9  101
calculate the value for the overall formation constant for
Mn(C2O4 ) 22:
2

K

Hg2 1aq2  4I 1aq2 ∆ HgI42 1aq2
110. A solution is formed by mixing 50.0 mL of 10.0 M NaX with
50.0 mL of 2.0  103 M CuNO3. Assume that Cu(I) forms complex ions with X as follows:
Cu 1aq2  X 1aq2 ∆ CuX1aq2

CuX1aq2  X 1aq2 ∆ CuX2 1aq2




CuX2 1aq2  X 1aq2 ∆ CuX32 1aq2

2

3Mn1C2O4 2 22 4

3Mn2 4 3 C2O42 4 2

106. In the presence of CN, Fe3 forms the complex ion Fe(CN) 63.
The equilibrium concentrations of Fe3 and Fe(CN) 63 are
8.5  1040 M and 1.5  103 M, respectively, in a 0.11 M KCN
solution. Calculate the value for the overall formation constant
of Fe(CN) 63.
Fe3 1aq2  6CN 1aq2 ∆ Fe1CN2 63

Koverall  ?

107. When aqueous KI is added gradually to mercury(II) nitrate, an
orange precipitate forms. Continued addition of KI causes the
precipitate to dissolve. Write balanced equations to explain these
observations. (Hint: Hg2 reacts with I to form HgI42.)
108. As sodium chloride solution is added to a solution of silver
nitrate, a white precipitate forms. Ammonia is added to the mixture and the precipitate dissolves. When potassium bromide
solution is then added, a pale yellow precipitate appears. When
a solution of sodium thiosulfate is added, the yellow precipitate
dissolves. Finally, potassium iodide is added to the solution and
a yellow precipitate forms. Write reactions for all the changes
mentioned above. What conclusions can you draw concerning
the sizes of the Ksp values for AgCl, AgBr, and AgI?
109. The overall formation constant for HgI42 is 1.0  1030. That is,
3HgI4 4
2

1.0  1030 

3Hg2 4 3 I 4 4

K1  1.0  102
K2  1.0  104
K3  1.0  103

with an overall reaction
Cu 1aq2  3X 1aq2 ∆ CuX32 1aq2

Complex Ion Equilibria
103. Write equations
lowing complex
a. Ni(CN) 42
b. V(C2O4 ) 33
104. Write equations
lowing complex
a. CoF63
b. Zn(NH3 ) 42

What is the concentration of Hg2 in 500.0 mL of a solution that
was originally 0.010 M Hg2 and 0.78 M I? The reaction is

K  1.0  109

Calculate the following concentrations at equilibrium.
b. CuX2
c. Cu
a. CuX32
111. a. Calculate the molar solubility of AgI in pure water. Ksp for
AgI is 1.5  1016.
b. Calculate the molar solubility of AgI in 3.0 M NH3. The overall formation constant for Ag(NH3)2 is 1.7  107.
c. Compare the calculated solubilities from parts a and b. Explain any differences.
112. Solutions of sodium thiosulfate are used to dissolve unexposed
AgBr (Ksp  5.0  1013) in the developing process for blackand-white ﬁlm. What mass of AgBr can dissolve in 1.00 L of 0.500
M Na2S2O3? Ag reacts with S2O32 to form a complex ion:
Ag 1aq2  2S2O32 1aq2 ∆ Ag1S2O3 2 23 1aq2
K  2.9  1013

113. Kf for the complex ion Ag(NH3)2 is 1.7  107. Ksp for AgCl is
1.6  1010. Calculate the molar solubility of AgCl in 1.0 M NH3.
114. The copper(I) ion forms a chloride salt that has Ksp  1.2  106.
Copper(I) also forms a complex ion with Cl:
Cu 1aq2  2Cl 1aq2 ∆ CuCl2 1aq2

K  8.7  104

a. Calculate the solubility of copper(I) chloride in pure water.
(Ignore CuCl2 formation for part a.)
b. Calculate the solubility of copper(I) chloride in 0.10 M NaCl.
115. A series of chemicals were added to some AgNO3(aq). NaCl(aq)
was added ﬁrst to the silver nitrate solution with the end result
shown below in test tube 1, NH3(aq) was then added with the
end result shown in test tube 2, and HNO3(aq) was added last
with the end result shown in test tube 3.

1

2

3

Explain the results shown in each test tube. Include a balanced
equation for the reaction(s) taking place.

Additional Exercises
116. The solubility of copper(II) hydroxide in water can be increased
by adding either the base NH3 or the acid HNO3. Explain. Would
added NH3 or HNO3 have the same effect on the solubility of
silver acetate or silver chloride? Explain.

Additional Exercises
117. Derive an equation analogous to the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation but relating pOH and pKb of a buffered solution composed of
a weak base and its conjugate acid, such as NH3 and NH4.
118. a. Calculate the pH of a buffered solution that is 0.100 M in
C6H5CO2H (benzoic acid, Ka  6.4  105) and 0.100 M in
C6H5CO2Na.
b. Calculate the pH after 20.0% (by moles) of the benzoic acid
is converted to benzoate anion by addition of strong acid. Use
the dissociation equilibrium

2.0 L. What is the pH of this buffer? What is the pH after 0.50
mL of 12 M HCl is added to a 200.0-mL portion of the buffer?
123. Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant for each of the
following reactions in aqueous solution.
a. HC2H3O2  OH ∆ C2H3O2  H2O
b. C2H3O2  H ∆ HC2H3O2
c. HCl  NaOH ∆ NaCl  H2O
124. The following plot shows the pH curves for the titrations of various acids by 0.10 M NaOH (all of the acids were 50.0-mL samples of 0.10 M concentration).

12.0

Benzoic acid (4.19)
Sodium acetate (4.74)
Potassium ﬂuoride (3.14)
Ammonium chloride (9.26)

5.0 M HCl
1.0 M acetic acid (4.74)
2.6 M NaOH
1.0 M HOCl (7.46)

What combinations of reagents would you use to prepare buffers
at the following pH values?
a. 3.0
b. 4.0
c. 5.0
d. 7.0
e. 9.0
122. Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, commonly called TRIS or
Trizma, is often used as a buffer in biochemical studies. Its
buffering range is pH 7 to 9, and Kb is 1.19  106 for the aqueous reaction
1HOCH2 2 3CNH2  H2O ∆ 1HOCH2 2 3CNH3  OH
TRIS
TRISH
a. What is the optimal pH for TRIS buffers?
b. Calculate the ratio [TRIS][TRISH] at pH  7.00 and at
pH  9.00.
c. A buffer is prepared by diluting 50.0 g TRIS base and 65.0 g
TRIS hydrochloride (written as TRISHCl) to a total volume of

e

6.0

d
c

4.0

C6H5CO2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ C6H5CO2H1aq2  OH 1aq2

Solutions

8.0
pH

to calculate the pH.
c. Do the same as in part b, but use the following equilibrium
to calculate the pH:

Solids (pKa of Acid
Form Is Given)

f

10.0

C6H5CO2H1aq2 ∆ C6H5CO2 1aq2  H 1aq2

d. Do your answers in parts b and c agree? Explain.
119. Consider a solution containing 0.10 M ethylamine (C2H5NH2),
0.20 M C2H5NH3, and 0.20 M Cl.
a. Calculate the pH of this solution.
b. Calculate the pH after 0.050 mol of KOH(s) is added to 1.00 L
of this solution. (Ignore any volume changes.)
120. You make 1.00 L of a buffered solution (pH  4.00) by mixing
acetic acid and sodium acetate. You have 1.00 M solutions of
each component of the buffered solution. What volume of each
solution do you mix to make such a buffered solution?
121. You have the following reagents on hand:

745

b

2.0

a
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Vol 0.10 M NaOH added (mL)

125.

126.
127.

128.

a. Which pH curve corresponds to the weakest acid?
b. Which pH curve corresponds to the strongest acid? Which
point on the pH curve would you examine to see if this acid
is a strong acid or a weak acid (assuming you did not know
the initial concentration of the acid)?
c. Which pH curve corresponds to an acid with Ka  1  106?
Calculate the volume of 1.50  102 M NaOH that must be
added to 500.0 mL of 0.200 M HCl to give a solution that has
pH  2.15.
Repeat the procedure in Exercise 57, but for the titration of
25.0 mL of 0.100 M HNO3 with 0.100 M NaOH.
The active ingredient in aspirin is acetylsalicylic acid. A 2.51-g
sample of acetylsalicylic acid required 27.36 mL of 0.5106 M
NaOH for complete reaction. Addition of 13.68 mL of 0.5106 M
HCl to the ﬂask containing the aspirin and the sodium hydroxide produced a mixture with pH  3.48. Find the molar mass of
acetylsalicylic acid and its Ka value. State any assumptions you
must make to reach your answer.
One method for determining the purity of aspirin (empirical formula, C9H8O4) is to hydrolyze it with NaOH solution and then
to titrate the remaining NaOH. The reaction of aspirin with
NaOH is as follows:
C9H8O4 1s2  2OH 1aq2
Aspirin

¬¡ C7H5O3 1aq2  C2H3O2 1aq2  H2O1l2
Boil

10 min

Salicylate ion

Acetate ion

A sample of aspirin with a mass of 1.427 g was boiled in
50.00 mL of 0.500 M NaOH. After the solution was cooled, it
took 31.92 mL of 0.289 M HCl to titrate the excess NaOH. Calculate the purity of the aspirin. What indicator should be used
for this titration? Why?

Chapter Fifteen Applications of Aqueous Equilibria

129. A certain acetic acid solution has pH  2.68. Calculate the volume of 0.0975 M KOH required to reach the equivalence point
in the titration of 25.0 mL of the acetic acid solution.
130. A 0.210-g sample of an acid (molar mass  192 g/mol) is
titrated with 30.5 mL of 0.108 M NaOH to a phenolphthalein
end point. Is the acid monoprotic, diprotic, or triprotic?
131. A student intends to titrate a solution of a weak monoprotic acid
with a sodium hydroxide solution but reverses the two solutions
and places the weak acid solution in the buret. After 23.75 mL
of the weak acid solution has been added to 50.0 mL of the
0.100 M NaOH solution, the pH of the resulting solution is
10.50. Calculate the original concentration of the solution of
weak acid.
132. A student titrates an unknown weak acid, HA, to a pale pink
phenolphthalein end point with 25.0 mL of 0.100 M NaOH. The
student then adds 13.0 mL of 0.100 M HCl. The pH of the resulting solution is 4.7. How is the value of pKa for the unknown
acid related to 4.7?
133. a. Using the Ksp value for Cu(OH)2 (1.6  1019) and the overall
formation constant for Cu(NH3)42 (1.0  1013), calculate the
value for the equilibrium constant for the following reaction:
Cu1OH2 2 1s2  4NH3 1aq2 ∆ Cu1NH3 2 42 1aq2  2OH 1aq2
b. Use the value of the equilibrium constant you calculated
in part a to calculate the solubility (in mol/L) of Cu(OH)2
in 5.0 M NH3. In 5.0 M NH3 the concentration of OH is
0.0095 M.
134. The solubility rules outlined in Chapter 4 say that Ba(OH)2,
Sr(OH)2, and Ca(OH)2 are marginally soluble hydroxides. Calculate the pH of a saturated solution of each of these marginally
soluble hydroxides.
135. The Ksp of hydroxyapatite, Ca5(PO4)3OH, is 6.8  1037. Calculate the solubility of hydroxyapatite in pure water in moles per
liter. How is the solubility of hydroxyapatite affected by adding
acid? When hydroxyapatite is treated with ﬂuoride, the mineral
ﬂuorapatite, Ca5(PO4)3F, forms. The Ksp of this substance is
1  1060. Calculate the solubility of ﬂuorapatite in water. How
do these calculations provide a rationale for the ﬂuoridation of
drinking water?
136. In the chapter discussion of precipitate formation, we ran the
precipitation reaction to completion and then let some of the precipitate redissolve to get back to equilibrium. To see why, redo
Sample Exercise 15.17, where
Initial
Concentration (mol/L)
[Mg2]0  3.75  103
[F]0  6.25  102
2

x mol/Mg
88888888n
reacts to
form MgF2

Equilibrium
Concentration (mol/L)

c. Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA4) is used as a complexing agent in chemical analysis and has the following
structure:
O
O

2C

CH2

2C

CH2

N

CH2

N

CH2

CO2

CH2

CO2

Solutions of EDTA4 are used to treat heavy metal poisoning by removing the heavy metal in the form of a soluble
complex ion. The complex ion virtually eliminates the heavy
metal ions from reacting with biochemical systems. The reaction of EDTA4 with Pb2 is
Pb2 1aq2  EDTA4 1aq2 ∆ PbEDTA2 1aq2
K  1.1  1018
Consider a solution with 0.010 mol Pb(NO3)2 added to 1.0 L
of an aqueous solution buffered at pH  13.00 and containing 0.050 M Na4EDTA. Does Pb(OH)2 precipitate from this
solution?

Challenge Problems
138. Another way to treat data from a pH titration is to graph the absolute value of the change in pH per change in milliliters added
versus milliliters added ( pH mL versus mL added). Make
this graph using your results from Exercise 57. What advantage
might this method have over the traditional method for treating
titration data?
139. A buffer is made using 45.0 mL of 0.750 M HC3H5O2
(Ka  1.3  105) and 55.0 mL of 0.700 M NaC3H5O2. What
volume of 0.10 M NaOH must be added to change the pH of the
original buffer solution by 2.5%?
140. A 0.400 M solution of ammonia was titrated with hydrochloric
acid to the equivalence point, where the total volume was 1.50
times the original volume. At what pH does the equivalence point
occur?
141. What volume of 0.0100 M NaOH must be added to 1.00 L of
0.0500 M HOCl to achieve a pH of 8.00?
142. Consider a solution formed by mixing 50.0 mL of 0.100 M
H2SO4, 30.0 mL of 0.100 M HOCl, 25.0 mL of 0.200 M NaOH,
25.0 mL of 0.100 M Ba(OH)2, and 10.0 mL of 0.150 M KOH.
Calculate the pH of this solution.
143. When a diprotic acid, H2A, is titrated by NaOH, the protons on
the diprotic acid are generally removed one at a time, resulting
in a pH curve that has the following generic shape:

[Mg2]  3.75  103  y
[F]  6.25  102  2y

137. Calculate the concentration of Pb2 in each of the following.
a. a saturated solution of Pb(OH)2, Ksp  1.2  1015
b. a saturated solution of Pb(OH)2 buffered at pH  13.00

CH2

Ethylenediaminetetraacetate

pH

746

Vol NaOH added

Marathon Problem
a. Notice that the plot has essentially two titration curves. If the
ﬁrst equivalence point occurs at 100.0 mL of NaOH added,
what volume of NaOH added corresponds to the second
equivalence point?
b. For the following volumes of NaOH added, list the major
species present after the OH reacts completely.
i. 0 mL NaOH added
ii. between 0 and 100.0 mL NaOH added
iii. 100.0 mL NaOH added
iv. between 100.0 and 200.0 mL NaOH added
v. 200.0 mL NaOH added
vi. after 200.0 mL NaOH added
c. If the pH at 50.0 mL of NaOH added is 4.0 and the pH at
150.0 mL of NaOH added is 8.0, determine the values Ka1 and
Ka2 for the diprotic acid.
144. The titration of Na2CO3 with HCl has the following qualitative
proﬁle:
A
B
C
D
pH

E

F

mL HCl

a. Identify the major species in solution as points A–F.
b. Calculate the pH at the halfway points to equivalence, B
and D. Hint: Refer to Exercise 143.
145. A few drops of each of the indicators shown in the accompanying table were placed in separate portions of a 1.0 M solution of
a weak acid, HX. The results are shown in the last column of
the table. What is the approximate pH of the solution containing HX? Calculate the approximate value of Ka for HX.

Indicator
Bromphenol
blue
Bromcresol
purple
Bromcresol
green
Alizarin

Color
of HIn

Color
of In

pKa
of HIn

HX

Yellow

Blue

4.0

Blue

Yellow

Purple

6.0

Yellow

Yellow

Blue

4.8

Green

Yellow

Red

6.5

Yellow

146. Consider a solution made by mixing 500.0 mL of 4.0 M NH3
and 500.0 mL of 0.40 M AgNO3. Ag reacts with NH3 to form
AgNH3 and Ag(NH3)2:
Ag  NH3 ∆ AgNH3

AgNH3  NH3 ∆ Ag1NH3 2 2

K1  2.1  103
K2  8.2  103

Determine the concentration of all species in solution.
147. What is the maximum possible concentration of Ni2 ion in water
at 25°C that is saturated with 0.10 M H2S and maintained at pH
3.0 with HCl?

747

148. You add an excess of solid MX in 250 g of water. You measure
the freezing point and ﬁnd it to be 0.028°C. What is the Ksp
of the solid? Assume the density of the solution is 1.0 g/cm3.
149. a. Calculate the molar solubility of SrF2 in water, ignoring the
basic properties of F. (For SrF2, Ksp  7.9  1010.)
b. Would the measured molar solubility of SrF2 be greater than
or less than the value calculated in part a? Explain.
c. Calculate the molar solubility of SrF2 in a solution buffered
at pH  2.00. (Ka for HF is 7.2  104.)
150. A solution saturated with a salt of the type M3X2 has an osmotic
pressure of 2.64  102 atm at 25°C. Calculate the Ksp value for
the salt, assuming ideal behavior.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

151. A buffer solution is prepared by mixing 75.0 mL of 0.275 M ﬂuorobenzoic acid (C7H5O2F) with 55.0 mL of 0.472 M sodium
ﬂuorobenzoate. The pKa of this weak acid is 2.90. What is the
pH of the buffer solution?
152. The Ksp for Q, a slightly soluble ionic compound composed of
M22 and X ions, is 4.5  1029. The electron conﬁguration of
M is [Xe]6s14f 145d10. The X anion has 54 electrons. What is
the molar solubility of Q in a solution of NaX prepared by dissolving 1.98 g of NaX in 150. mL of water?
153. Calculate the pH of a solution prepared by mixing 250. mL of
0.174 m aqueous HF (density  1.10 g/mL) with 38.7 g of an
aqueous solution that is 1.50% NaOH by mass (density 
1.02 g/mL). (Ka for HF  7.2  104.)

Marathon Problem*
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

154. A 225-mg sample of a diprotic acid is dissolved in enough water to make 250. mL of solution. The pH of this solution is 2.06.
A saturated solution of calcium hydroxide (Ksp  1.3  106 )
is prepared by adding excess calcium hydroxide to pure water
and then removing the undissolved solid by ﬁltration. Enough
of the calcium hydroxide solution is added to the solution of the
acid to reach the second equivalence point. The pH at the second equivalence point (as determined by a pH meter) is 7.96.
The ﬁrst dissociation constant for the acid (Ka1) is 5.90  102.
Assume that the volumes of the solutions are additive, all solutions are at 25°C, and that Ka1 is at least 1000 times greater
than Ka2.
a. Calculate the molar mass of the acid.
b. Calculate the second dissociation constant for the acid (Ka2) .
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.
*Used with permission from the Journal of Chemical Education, Vol. 68,
No. 11, 1991, pp. 919–922; copyright © 1991, Division of Chemical Education, Inc.

16

Spontaneity, Entropy,
and Free Energy

Contents
16.1 Spontaneous Processes and
Entropy
16.2 Entropy and the Second Law
of Thermodynamics
16.3 The Effect of Temperature
on Spontaneity
16.4 Free Energy
16.5 Entropy Changes in
Chemical Reactions
16.6 Free Energy and Chemical
Reactions
16.7 The Dependence of Free
Energy on Pressure
• The Meaning of ¢G for a
Chemical Reaction
16.8 Free Energy and Equilibrium
• The Temperature Dependence
of K
16.9 Free Energy and Work

Solid carbon dioxide (dry ice), when placed in water, causes violent bubbling as gaseous CO2 is
released. The “fog” is moisture condensed from the cold air.

748

T

he ﬁrst law of thermodynamics is a statement of the law of conservation of energy:
Energy can be neither created nor destroyed. In other words, the energy of the universe
is constant. Although the total energy is constant, the various forms of energy can be interchanged in physical and chemical processes. For example, if you drop a book, some of
the initial potential energy of the book is changed to kinetic energy, which is then transferred to the atoms in the air and the ﬂoor as random motion. The net effect of this process
is to change a given quantity of potential energy to exactly the same quantity of thermal
energy. Energy has been converted from one form to another, but the same quantity of energy exists before and after the process.
Now let’s consider a chemical example. When methane is burned in excess oxygen,
the major reaction is
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2  energy

This reaction produces a quantity of energy, which is released as heat. This energy ﬂow
results from the lowering of the potential energy stored in the bonds of CH4 and O2 as
they react to form CO2 and H2O. This is illustrated in Fig. 16.1. Potential energy has been
converted to thermal energy, but the energy content of the universe has remained constant
in accordance with the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics.
The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics is used mainly for energy bookkeeping, that is, to
answer such questions as
How much energy is involved in the change?
Does energy ﬂow into or out of the system?
What form does the energy ﬁnally assume?
The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics: The
energy of the universe is constant.

Although the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics provides the means for accounting for energy,
it gives no hint as to why a particular process occurs in a given direction. This is the main
question to be considered in this chapter.

16.1

FIGURE 16.1
When methane and oxygen react to form
carbon dioxide and water, the products have
lower potential energy than the reactants.
This change in potential energy results in
energy ﬂow (heat) to the surroundings.

A process is said to be spontaneous if it occurs without outside intervention. Spontaneous
processes may be fast or slow. As we will see in this chapter, thermodynamics can tell us
the direction in which a process will occur but can say nothing about the speed of the
process. As we saw in Chapter 12, the rate of a reaction depends on many factors, such
as activation energy, temperature, concentration, and catalysts, and we were able to explain these effects using a simple collision model. In describing a chemical reaction, the
discipline of chemical kinetics focuses on the pathway between reactants and products;
thermodynamics considers only the initial and ﬁnal states and does not require knowledge
of the pathway between reactants and products (see Fig. 16.2).

Energy

Spontaneous does not mean fast.

Spontaneous Processes and Entropy

CH4, 2O2
Change in energy

heat
CO2, 2H2O

749

750

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
Domain of
thermodynamics
(the initial and
final states)

Energy

Domain of kinetics
(the reaction pathway)

FIGURE 16.2
The rate of a reaction depends on the pathway from reactants to products; this is the
domain of kinetics. Thermodynamics tells
us whether a reaction is spontaneous based
only on the properties of the reactants and
products. The predictions of thermodynamics do not require knowledge of the pathway between reactants and products.

Reactants

Products

Reaction progress

In summary, thermodynamics lets us predict whether a process will occur but gives
no information about the amount of time required for the process. For example, according to the principles of thermodynamics, a diamond should change spontaneously to
graphite. The fact that we do not observe this process does not mean the prediction is
wrong; it simply means the process is very slow. Thus we need both thermodynamics and
kinetics to describe reactions fully.
To explore the idea of spontaneity, consider the following physical and chemical
processes:
A ball rolls down a hill but never spontaneously rolls back up the hill.
If exposed to air and moisture, steel rusts spontaneously. However, the iron oxide in
rust does not spontaneously change back to iron metal and oxygen gas.
A gas ﬁlls its container uniformly. It never spontaneously collects at one end of the
container.
Heat ﬂow always occurs from a hot object to a cooler one. The reverse process never
occurs spontaneously.
Wood burns spontaneously in an exothermic reaction to form carbon dioxide and water, but wood is not formed when carbon dioxide and water are heated together.
At temperatures below 0°C, water spontaneously freezes, and at temperatures above
0°C, ice spontaneously melts.
What thermodynamic principle will provide an explanation of why, under a given set of
conditions, each of these diverse processes occurs in one direction and never in the reverse? In searching for an answer, we could explain the behavior of a ball on a hill in
terms of gravity. But what does gravity have to do with the rusting of a nail or the freezing of water? Early developers of thermodynamics thought that exothermicity might be
the key—that a process would be spontaneous if it were exothermic. Although this factor

16.1 Spontaneous Processes and Entropy

751

Plant materials burn to form carbon
dioxide and water.

A disordered pile of playing cards.

Probability refers to likelihood.

Visualization: Entropy

does appear to be important, since many spontaneous processes are exothermic, it is not
the total answer. For example, the melting of ice, which occurs spontaneously at temperatures greater than 0°C, is an endothermic process.
What common characteristic causes the processes listed above to be spontaneous in
one direction only? After many years of observation, scientists have concluded that the
characteristic common to all spontaneous processes is an increase in a property called
entropy, denoted by the symbol S. The driving force for a spontaneous process is an increase in the entropy of the universe.
What is entropy? Although there is no simple deﬁnition that is completely accurate,
entropy can be viewed as a measure of molecular randomness or disorder. The natural
progression of things is from order to disorder, from lower entropy to higher entropy. To
illustrate the natural tendency toward disorder, you only have to think about the condition
of your room. Your room naturally tends to get messy (disordered), because an ordered
room requires everything to be in its place. There are simply many more ways for things
to be out of place than for them to be in their places.
As another example, suppose you have a deck of playing cards ordered in some
particular way. You throw these cards into the air and pick them all up at random.
Looking at the new sequence of the cards, you would be very surprised to ﬁnd that it
matched the original order. Such an event would be possible, but very improbable. There
are billions of ways for the deck to be disordered, but only one way to be ordered according to your deﬁnition. Thus the chances of picking the cards up out of order are
much greater than the chance of picking them up in order. It is natural for disorder to
increase.
Entropy is a thermodynamic function that describes the number of arrangements
(positions and/or energy levels) that are available to a system existing in a given state.
Entropy is closely associated with probability. The key concept is that the more ways a
particular state can be achieved, the greater is the likelihood (probability) of ﬁnding that
state. In other words, nature spontaneously proceeds toward the states that have the highest probabilities of existing. This conclusion is not surprising at all. The difﬁculty comes
in connecting this concept to real-life processes. For example, what does the spontaneous
rusting of steel have to do with probability? Understanding the connection between entropy and spontaneity will allow us to answer such questions. We will begin to explore
this connection by considering a very simple process, the expansion of an ideal gas into

752

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
Ideal gas

Vacuum

FIGURE 16.3
The expansion of an ideal gas into an
evacuated bulb.

Arrangement I

Arrangement II

Arrangement III

Arrangement IV

Arrangement V

FIGURE 16.4
Possible arrangements (states) of four
molecules in a two-bulbed ﬂask.

a vacuum, as represented in Fig. 16.3. Why is this process spontaneous? The driving force
is probability. Because there are more ways of having the gas evenly spread throughout
the container than there are ways for it to be in any other possible state, the gas spontaneously attains the uniform distribution.
To understand this conclusion, we will greatly simplify the system and consider the
possible arrangements of only four gas molecules in the two-bulbed container (Fig. 16.4).
How many ways can each arrangement (state) be achieved? Arrangements I and V can
be achieved in only one way—all the molecules must be in one end. Arrangements II
and V can be achieved in four ways, as shown in Table 16.1. Each conﬁguration that
gives a particular arrangement is called a microstate. Arrangement I has one microstate,
and arrangement II has four microstates. Arrangement III can be achieved in six ways
(six microstates), as shown in Table 16.1. Which arrangement is most likely to occur?
The one that can be achieved in the greatest number of ways. Thus arrangement III is
most probable. The relative probabilities of arrangements III, II, and I are 6 : 4 : 1. We
have discovered an important principle: The probability of occurrence of a particular
arrangement (state) depends on the number of ways (microstates) in which that arrangement can be achieved.
The consequences of this principle are dramatic for large numbers of molecules. One
gas molecule in the ﬂask in Fig. 16.4 has one chance in two of being in the left bulb. We
say that the probability of ﬁnding the molecule in the left bulb is 21. For two molecules in
the ﬂask, there is one chance in two of ﬁnding each molecule in the left bulb, so there is
one chance in four (12  12  14) that both molecules will be in the left bulb. As the number of molecules increases, the relative probability of ﬁnding all of them in the left bulb
decreases, as shown in Table 16.2. For 1 mole of gas, the probability of ﬁnding all the
molecules in the left bulb is so small that this arrangement would “never” occur.
Thus a gas placed in one end of a container will spontaneously expand to ﬁll the entire vessel evenly because, for a large number of gas molecules, there is a huge number
of microstates in which equal numbers of molecules are in both ends. On the other hand,
the opposite process,

753

16.1 Spontaneous Processes and Entropy

TABLE 16.1

The Microstates That Give a Particular Arrangement (State)

Arrangement

Microstates

I

A B
C D

II

A

B
A

D C
A

III

C
D

B

B

D

A

B
D

C
A

A

D

C

B

C

B

D

C

A

B

D

C
B

A

D

C

B
C

D

IV

A

C

A

B

D

A

C
D

B

B

A
D C

A
C

D

B

V

A

TABLE 16.2 Probability of Finding All the Molecules in the
Left Bulb as a Function of the Total Number of Molecules

A

Number of Molecules

B

1
A

B

2
3

A
B

5
10

Thus there is one chance in four of ﬁnding
n
A
B

B
D

C

A
B
C D

For two molecules in the ﬂask, there are
four possible microstates:

B

A

6  10 23 (1 mole)

Relative Probability of
Finding All Molecules
in the Left Bulb
1
2
1
1
1
1
  2
2
2
4
2
1
1
1
1
1
   3
2
2
2
8
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
     5
2
2
2
2
2
32
2
1
1

1024
210
1
1 n

a
b
2n
2
610 23
1
23
 10 1210 2
a b
2

754

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

Solid, liquid, and gaseous states were
compared in Chapter 10.
Solids are more ordered than liquids or
gases and thus have lower entropy.

although not impossible, is highly improbable, since only one microstate leads to this
arrangement. Therefore, this process does not occur spontaneously.
The type of probability we have been considering in this example is called positional
probability because it depends on the number of conﬁgurations in space (positional microstates) that yield a particular state. A gas expands into a vacuum to give a uniform
distribution because the expanded state has the highest positional probability, that is, the
largest entropy, of the states available to the system.
Positional probability is also illustrated by changes of state. In general, positional entropy increases in going from solid to liquid to gas. A mole of a substance has a much
smaller volume in the solid state than it does in the gaseous state. In the solid state, the
molecules are close together, with relatively few positions available to them; in the gaseous
state, the molecules are far apart, with many more positions available to them. The liquid
state is closer to the solid state than it is to the gaseous state in these terms. We can summarize these comparisons as follows:

Ssolid

The tendency to mix is due to the increased volume available to the particles of
each component of the mixture. For example, when two liquids are mixed, the molecules of each liquid have more available
volume and thus more available positions.

Sample Exercise 16.1

Sliquid

Sgas

Positional entropy is also very important in the formation of solutions. In Chapter
11 we saw that solution formation is favored by the natural tendency for substances to
mix. We can now be more precise. The entropy change associated with the mixing of
two pure substances is expected to be positive. An increase in entropy is expected because there are many more microstates for the mixed condition than for the separated
condition. This effect is due principally to the increased volume available to a given “particle” after mixing occurs. For example, when two liquids are mixed to form a solution,
the molecules of each liquid have more available volume and thus more available positions. Therefore, the increase in positional entropy associated with mixing favors the formation of solutions.

Positional Entropy
For each of the following pairs, choose the substance with the higher positional entropy
(per mole) at a given temperature.
a. Solid CO2 and gaseous CO2
b. N2 gas at 1 atm and N2 gas at 1.0  102 atm
Solution
a. Since a mole of gaseous CO2 has the greater volume by far, the molecules have many
more available positions than in a mole of solid CO2. Thus gaseous CO2 has the higher
positional entropy.
b. A mole of N2 gas at 1  102 atm has a volume 100 times that (at a given temperature)
of a mole of N2 gas at 1 atm. Thus N2 gas at 1  102 atm has the higher positional
entropy.
See Exercise 16.23.

16.2 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics

Sample Exercise 16.2

755

Predicting Entropy Changes
Predict the sign of the entropy change for each of the following processes.
a. Solid sugar is added to water to form a solution.
b. Iodine vapor condenses on a cold surface to form crystals.
Solution
a. The sugar molecules become randomly dispersed in the water when the solution forms
and thus have access to a larger volume and a larger number of possible positions. The
positional disorder is increased, and there will be an increase in entropy. ¢S is positive,
since the ﬁnal state has a larger entropy than the initial state, and ¢S  Sfinal  Sinitial.
b. Gaseous iodine is forming a solid. This process involves a change from a relatively
large volume to a much smaller volume, which results in lower positional disorder. For
this process ¢S is negative (the entropy decreases).
See Exercise 16.24.

16.2
The total energy of the universe is
constant, but the entropy is increasing.

Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics

We have seen that processes are spontaneous when they result in an increase in disorder.
Nature always moves toward the most probable state available to it. We can state this principle in terms of entropy: In any spontaneous process there is always an increase in the
entropy of the universe. This is the second law of thermodynamics. Contrast this with
the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, which tells us that the energy of the universe is constant.
Energy is conserved in the universe, but entropy is not. In fact, the second law can be
paraphrased as follows: The entropy of the universe is increasing.
As in Chapter 6, we ﬁnd it convenient to divide the universe into a system and the
surroundings. Thus we can represent the change in the entropy of the universe as
¢Suniv  ¢Ssys  ¢Ssurr
where ¢Ssys and ¢Ssurr represent the changes in entropy that occur in the system and surroundings, respectively.
To predict whether a given process will be spontaneous, we must know the sign of
¢Suniv. If ¢Suniv is positive, the entropy of the universe increases, and the process is
spontaneous in the direction written. If ¢Suniv is negative, the process is spontaneous in
the opposite direction. If ¢Suniv is zero, the process has no tendency to occur, and the
system is at equilibrium. To predict whether a process is spontaneous, we must consider
the entropy changes that occur both in the system and in the surroundings and then take
their sum.

Sample Exercise 16.3

The Second Law
In a living cell, large molecules are assembled from simple ones. Is this process consistent with the second law of thermodynamics?
Solution
To reconcile the operation of an order-producing cell with the second law of thermodynamics, we must remember that ¢Suniv, not ¢Ssys, must be positive for a process to be
spontaneous. A process for which ¢Ssys is negative can be spontaneous if the associated
¢Ssurr is both larger and positive. The operation of a cell is such a process.
See Questions 16.7 and 16.8.

756

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Entropy: An Organizing Force?
n this text we have emphasized the meaning of the second
law of thermodynamics—that the entropy of the universe
is always increasing. Although the results of all our experiments support this conclusion, this does not mean that
order cannot appear spontaneously in a given part of the
universe. The best example of this phenomenon involves
the assembly of cells in living organisms. Of course, when
a process that creates an ordered system is examined in
detail, it is found that other parts of the process involve
an increase in disorder such that the sum of all the entropy
changes is positive. In fact, scientists are now ﬁnding that
the search for maximum entropy in one part of a system
can be a powerful force for organization in another part of
the system.
To understand how entropy can be an organizing force,
look at the accompanying ﬁgure. In a system containing
large and small “balls” as shown in the ﬁgure, the small balls
can “herd” the large balls into clumps in the corners and
near the walls. This clears out the maximum space for the
small balls so that they can move more freely, thus maximizing the entropy of the system, as demanded by the second
law of thermodynamics.
In essence, the ability to maximize entropy by sorting
different-sized objects creates a kind of attractive force,
called a depletion, or excluded-volume, force. These “entropic forces” operate for objects in the size range of
approximately 108 to approximately 106 m. For entropyinduced ordering to occur, the particles must be constantly
jostling each other and must be constantly agitated by solvent molecules, thus making gravity unimportant.

I

16.3

There is increasing evidence that entropic ordering is
important in many biological systems. For example, this
phenomenon seems to be responsible for the clumping of
sickle-cell hemoglobin in the presence of much smaller proteins that act as the “smaller balls.” Entropic forces also have
been linked to the clustering of DNA in cells without nuclei, and Allen Minton of the National Institutes of Health
in Bethesda, Maryland, is studying the role of entropic forces
in the binding of proteins to cell membranes.
Entropic ordering also appears in nonbiological settings, especially in the ways polymer molecules clump together. For example, polymers added to paint to improve the
ﬂow characteristics of the paint actually caused it to coagulate because of depletion forces.
Thus, as you probably have concluded already, entropy
is a complex issue. As entropy drives the universe to its ultimate death of maximum chaos, it provides some order
along the way.

The Effect of Temperature on Spontaneity

To explore the interplay of ¢Ssys and ¢Ssurr in determining the sign of ¢Suniv, we will ﬁrst
discuss the change of state for one mole of water from liquid to gas,
H2O1l2 ¡ H2O1g2
considering the water to be the system and everything else the surroundings.
What happens to the entropy of water in this process? A mole of liquid water
(18 grams) has a volume of approximately 18 mL. A mole of gaseous water at 1 atmosphere and 100°C occupies a volume of approximately 31 liters. Clearly, there are many
more positions available to the water molecules in a volume of 31 L than in 18 mL, and
the vaporization of water is favored by this increase in positional probability. That is, for
this process the entropy of the system increases; ¢Ssys has a positive sign.
What about the entropy change in the surroundings? Although we will not prove it
here, entropy changes in the surroundings are determined primarily by the ﬂow of energy

16.3 The Effect of Temperature on Spontaneity

Boiling water to form steam increases its
volume and thus its entropy.

In an endothermic process, heat ﬂows
from the surroundings into the system.
In an exothermic process, heat ﬂows into
the surroundings from the system.

In a process occurring at constant temperature, the tendency for the system to
lower its energy results from the positive
value of ¢Ssurr.

757

into or out of the system as heat. To understand this, suppose an exothermic process transfers 50 J of energy as heat to the surroundings, where it becomes thermal energy, that is,
kinetic energy associated with the random motions of atoms. Thus this ﬂow of energy into
the surroundings increases the random motions of atoms there and thereby increases the
entropy of the surroundings. The sign of ¢Ssurr is positive. When an endothermic process
occurs in the system, it produces the opposite effect. Heat ﬂows from the surroundings to
the system, and the random motions of the atoms in the surroundings decrease, decreasing the entropy of the surroundings. The vaporization of water is an endothermic process.
Thus, for this change of state, ¢Ssurr is negative.
Remember it is the sign of ¢Suniv that tells us whether the vaporization of water is
spontaneous. We have seen that ¢Ssys is positive and favors the process and that ¢Ssurr is
negative and unfavorable. Thus the components of ¢Suniv are in opposition. Which one
controls the situation? The answer depends on the temperature. We know that at a pressure of 1 atmosphere, water changes spontaneously from liquid to gas at all temperatures
above 100°C. Below 100ºC, the opposite process (condensation) is spontaneous.
Since ¢Ssys and ¢Ssurr are in opposition for the vaporization of water, the temperature
must have an effect on the relative importance of these two terms. To understand why this
is so, we must discuss in more detail the factors that control the entropy changes in the
surroundings. The central idea is that the entropy changes in the surroundings are primarily
determined by heat ﬂow. An exothermic process in the system increases the entropy of the
surroundings, because the resulting energy ﬂow increases the random motions in the surroundings. This means that exothermicity is an important driving force for spontaneity. In
earlier chapters we have seen that a system tends to undergo changes that lower its energy.
We now understand the reason for this tendency. When a system at constant temperature
moves to a lower energy, the energy it gives up is transferred to the surroundings, leading to an increase in entropy there.
The signiﬁcance of exothermicity as a driving force depends on the temperature at
which the process occurs. That is, the magnitude of ¢Ssurr depends on the temperature at
which the heat is transferred. We will not attempt to prove this fact here. Instead, we offer an analogy. Suppose that you have $50 to give away. Giving it to a millionaire would
not create much of an impression—a millionaire has money to spare. However, to a poor
college student, $50 would represent a signiﬁcant sum and would be received with considerable joy. The same principle can be applied to energy transfer via the ﬂow of heat.
If 50 J of energy is transferred to the surroundings, the impact of that event depends greatly
on the temperature. If the temperature of the surroundings is very high, the atoms there
are in rapid motion. The 50 J of energy will not make a large percent change in these motions. On the other hand, if 50 J of energy is transferred to the surroundings at a very low
temperature, where atomic motion is slow, the energy will cause a large percent change
in these motions. The impact of the transfer of a given quantity of energy as heat to or
from the surroundings will be greater at lower temperatures.
For our purposes, there are two important characteristics of the entropy changes that
occur in the surroundings:
1. The sign of ¢Ssurr depends on the direction of the heat ﬂow. At constant temperature,
an exothermic process in the system causes heat to ﬂow into the surroundings, increasing the random motions and thus the entropy of the surroundings. For this case,
¢Ssurr is positive. The opposite is true for an endothermic process in a system at constant temperature. Note that although the driving force described here really results
from the change in entropy, it is often described in terms of energy: Nature tends to
seek the lowest possible energy.
2. The magnitude of ¢Ssurr depends on the temperature. The transfer of a given quantity
of energy as heat produces a much greater percent change in the randomness of the
surroundings at a low temperature than it does at a high temperature. Thus ¢Ssurr depends directly on the quantity of heat transferred and inversely on temperature. In

758

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
other words, the tendency for the system to lower its energy becomes a more important driving force at lower temperatures.
Driving force
magnitude of the
quantity of heat 1J2
provided by
 entropy change of 
the energy flow
temperature 1K2
the surroundings
1heat2
These ideas are summarized as follows:

Exothermic process:
Ssurr  positive

Exothermic process:

Endothermic process:
Ssurr  negative

Endothermic process:

quantity of heat 1J2
temperature 1K2
quantity of heat 1J2
¢Ssurr  
temperature 1K2

¢Ssurr  

We can express ¢Ssurr in terms of the change in enthalpy ¢H for a process occurring
at constant pressure, since
Heat flow 1constant P2  change in enthalpy  ¢H
When no subscript is present, the quantity
(for example, ¢H ) refers to the system.

Recall that ¢H consists of two parts: a sign and a number. The sign indicates the direction of ﬂow, where a plus sign means into the system (endothermic) and a minus sign
means out of the system (exothermic). The number indicates the quantity of energy.
Combining all these concepts produces the following deﬁnition of ¢Ssurr for a reaction that takes place under conditions of constant temperature (in kelvins) and pressure:
¢Ssurr  

The minus sign changes the point of view
from the system to the surroundings.

Sample Exercise 16.4

¢H
T

The minus sign is necessary because the sign of ¢H is determined with respect to the reaction system, and this equation expresses a property of the surroundings. This means that
if the reaction is exothermic, ¢H has a negative sign, but since heat ﬂows into the surroundings, ¢Ssurr is positive.

Determining ¢Ssurr
In the metallurgy of antimony, the pure metal is recovered via different reactions, depending on the composition of the ore. For example, iron is used to reduce antimony in
sulﬁde ores:
Sb2S3 1s2  3Fe1s2 ¡ 2Sb1s2  3FeS1s2

¢H  125 kJ

Carbon is used as the reducing agent for oxide ores:
Sb4O6 1s2  6C1s2 ¡ 4Sb1s2  6CO1g2

¢H  778 kJ

Calculate ¢Ssurr for each of these reactions at 25°C and 1 atm.
Solution
We use
¢Ssurr  

¢H
T

T  25  273  298 K

where
For the sulﬁde ore reaction,

¢Ssurr  

125 kJ
 0.419 kJ/K  419 J/K
298 K

16.4 Free Energy

TABLE 16.3
of Suniv

759

Interplay of Ssys and Ssurr in Determining the Sign

Signs of Entropy Changes

The mineral stibnite contains Sb2S3.

Ssys

Ssurr

Suniv














?





?

Process Spontaneous?

Yes
No (reaction will occur
in opposite direction)
Yes, if Ssys has a larger
magnitude than Ssurr
Yes, if Ssurr has a larger
magnitude than Ssys

Note that ¢Ssurr is positive, as it should be, since this reaction is exothermic and heat ﬂow
occurs to the surroundings, increasing the randomness of the surroundings.
For the oxide ore reaction,
¢Ssurr  

778 kJ
 2.61 kJ/K  2.61  103 J/K
298

In this case ¢Ssurr is negative because heat ﬂow occurs from the surroundings to the system.
See Exercises 16.25 and 16.26.
We have seen that the spontaneity of a process is determined by the entropy change
it produces in the universe. We also have seen that ¢Suniv has two components, ¢Ssys and
¢Ssurr. If for some process both ¢Ssys and ¢Ssurr are positive, then ¢Suniv is positive, and
the process is spontaneous. If, on the other hand, both ¢Ssys and ¢Ssurr are negative, the
process does not occur in the direction indicated but is spontaneous in the opposite direction. Finally, if ¢Ssys and ¢Ssurr have opposite signs, the spontaneity of the process depends on the sizes of the opposing terms. These cases are summarized in Table 16.3.
We can now understand why spontaneity is often dependent on temperature and thus
why water spontaneously freezes below 0°C and melts above 0°C. The term ¢Ssurr is
temperature-dependent. Since
¢Ssurr  

¢H
T

at constant pressure, the value of ¢Ssurr changes markedly with temperature. The magnitude of ¢Ssurr will be very small at high temperatures and will increase as the temperature decreases. That is, exothermicity is most important as a driving force at low
temperatures.

16.4
The symbol G for free energy honors
Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839–1903), who
was professor of mathematical physics at
Yale University from 1871 to 1903. He laid
the foundations of many areas of thermodynamics, particularly as they apply to
chemistry.

Free Energy

So far we have used ¢Suniv to predict the spontaneity of a process. However, another thermodynamic function is also related to spontaneity and is especially useful in dealing with
the temperature dependence of spontaneity. This function is called the free energy, which
is symbolized by G and deﬁned by the relationship
G  H  TS
where H is the enthalpy, T is the Kelvin temperature, and S is the entropy.

760

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
For a process that occurs at constant temperature, the change in free energy ( ¢G) is
given by the equation
Visualization: Spontaneous
Reactions

¢G  ¢H  T¢S
Note that all quantities here refer to the system. From this point on we will follow the
usual convention that when no subscript is included, the quantity refers to the system.
To see how this equation relates to spontaneity, we divide both sides of the equation
by T to produce


¢G
¢H

 ¢S
T
T

Remember that at constant temperature and pressure
¢Ssurr  

¢H
T

So we can write


¢G
¢H

 ¢S  ¢Ssurr  ¢S  ¢Suniv
T
T

We have shown that
¢Suniv  

¢G
T

at constant T and P

This result is very important. It means that a process carried out at constant temperature and
pressure will be spontaneous only if ¢G is negative. That is, a process (at constant T and P)
is spontaneous in the direction in which the free energy decreases (¢G means ¢Suniv).
Now we have two functions that can be used to predict spontaneity: the entropy of
the universe, which applies to all processes, and free energy, which can be used for
processes carried out at constant temperature and pressure. Since so many chemical reactions occur under the latter conditions, free energy is the more useful to chemists.
Let’s use the free energy equation to predict the spontaneity of the melting of ice:
H2O1s2 ¡ H2O1l2
for which
The superscript degree symbol (°)
indicates all substances are in their
standard states.
To review the deﬁnitions of standard
states, see page 246.

TABLE 16.4

¢H°  6.03  103 J/mol and

¢S°  22.1 J/K  mol

Results of the calculations of ¢Suniv and ¢G° at 10°C, 0°C, and 10°C are shown in
Table 16.4. These data predict that the process is spontaneous at 10°C; that is, ice melts
at this temperature because ¢Suniv is positive and ¢G° is negative. The opposite is true at
10°C, where water freezes spontaneously.
Why is this so? The answer lies in the fact that ¢Ssys ( ¢S°) and ¢Ssurr oppose each other.
The term ¢S° favors the melting of ice because of the increase in positional entropy, and
¢Ssurr favors the freezing of water because it is an exothermic process. At temperatures below

Results of the Calculation of Suniv and G for the Process H2O(s) n H2O(l ) at 10C, 0C, and 10C*

T
(°C)

T
(K)

H 
(J/mol)

S
(J/K  mol)

10
0
10

263
273
283

6.03  103
6.03  103
6.03  103

22.1
22.1
22.1

H
T
(J/K  mol)

Ssurr  

22.9
22.1
21.3

Suniv 
S  Ssurr
(J/K  mol)

TS
(J/mol)

G  H  TS
(J/mol)

0.8
0
0.8

5.81  103
6.03  103
6.25  103

2.2  102
0
2.2  102

*Note that at 10°C, ¢S° ( ¢S sys) controls, and the process occurs even though it is endothermic. At 10°C, the magnitude of ¢ Ssurr is larger than that
of ¢S°, so the process is spontaneous in the opposite (exothermic) direction.

16.4 Free Energy

761

0°C, the change of state occurs in the exothermic direction because ¢Ssurr is larger in magnitude than ¢Ssys. But above 0°C the change occurs in the direction in which ¢Ssys is favorable,
since in this case ¢Ssys is larger in magnitude than ¢Ssurr. At 0°C the opposing tendencies
just balance, and the two states coexist; there is no driving force in either direction. An equilibrium exists between the two states of water. Note that ¢Suniv is equal to 0 at 0°C.
We can reach the same conclusions by examining ¢G°. At 10°, ¢G° is positive because the ¢H° term is larger than the T¢S° term. The opposite is true at 10°C. At 0°C,
¢H° is equal to T¢S° and ¢G° is equal to 0. This means that solid H2O and liquid H2O have
the same free energy at 0°C (¢G°  Gliquid  Gsolid ), and the system is at equilibrium.
We can understand the temperature dependence of spontaneity by examining the
behavior of ¢G. For a process occurring at constant temperature and pressure,
¢G  ¢H  T¢S
If ¢H and ¢S favor opposite processes, spontaneity will depend on temperature in
such a way that the exothermic direction will be favored at low temperatures. For example, for the process
H2O1s2 ¡ H2O1l2
¢H is positive and ¢S is positive. The natural tendency for this system to lower its energy is in opposition to its natural tendency to increase its positional randomness. At low
temperatures, ¢H dominates, and at high temperatures, ¢S dominates. The various possible cases are summarized in Table 16.5.
Sample Exercise 16.5

Free Energy and Spontaneity
At what temperatures is the following process spontaneous at 1 atm?
Br2 1l2 ¡ Br2 1g2
¢H°  31.0 kJ/mol and ¢S°  93.0 J/K  mol
What is the normal boiling point of liquid Br2?
Solution
The vaporization process will be spontaneous at all temperatures where G is negative. Note
that S favors the vaporization process because of the increase in positional entropy, and
H favors the opposite process, which is exothermic. These opposite tendencies will exactly
balance at the boiling point of liquid Br2, since at this temperature liquid and gaseous Br2 are
in equilibrium ( G  0). We can ﬁnd this temperature by setting G  0 in the equation
¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°
0  ¢H°  T¢S°
¢H°  T¢S°
TABLE 16.5 Various Possible Combinations of H and S for a Process and
the Resulting Dependence of Spontaneity on Temperature

Note that although H and S are somewhat temperature-dependent, it is a good
approximation to assume they are constant over a relatively small temperature
range.

Case
S positive, H negative
S positive, H positive
S negative, H negative
S negative, H positive

Result
Spontaneous at all temperatures
Spontaneous at high temperatures
(where exothermicity is relatively unimportant)
Spontaneous at low temperatures
(where exothermicity is dominant)
Process not spontaneous at any temperature
(reverse process is spontaneous at all temperatures)

762

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

T

Then

¢H°
3.10  104 J/mol

 333 K
¢S°
93.0 J/K  mol

At temperatures above 333 K, T S has a larger magnitude than H, and G (or H 
T S) is negative. Above 333 K, the vaporization process is spontaneous; the opposite
process occurs spontaneously below this temperature. At 333 K, liquid and gaseous Br2
coexist in equilibrium. These observations can be summarized as follows (the pressure is
1 atm in each case):
1. T  333 K. The term
porized is dominant.

S controls. The increase in entropy when liquid Br2 is va-

2. T  333 K. The process is spontaneous in the direction in which it is exothermic.
The term H controls.
3. T  333 K. The opposing driving forces are just balanced ( G  0), and the liquid
and gaseous phases of bromine coexist. This is the normal boiling point.
See Exercises 16.29 through 16.31.

16.5

Entropy Changes in Chemical Reactions

The second law of thermodynamics tells us that a process will be spontaneous if the entropy of the universe increases when the process occurs. We saw in Section 16.4 that for
a process at constant temperature and pressure, we can use the change in free energy of
the system to predict the sign of ¢Suniv and thus the direction in which it is spontaneous.
So far we have applied these ideas only to physical processes, such as changes of state
and the formation of solutions. However, the main business of chemistry is studying chemical reactions, and, therefore, we want to apply the second law to reactions.
First, we will consider the entropy changes accompanying chemical reactions that occur under conditions of constant temperature and pressure. As for the other types of processes
we have considered, the entropy changes in the surroundings are determined by the heat
ﬂow that occurs as the reaction takes place. However, the entropy changes in the system (the
reactants and products of the reaction) are determined by positional probability.
For example, in the ammonia synthesis reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
four reactant molecules become two product molecules, lowering the number of independent units in the system, which leads to less positional disorder.

Greater entropy

N
H

Less entropy

16.5 Entropy Changes in Chemical Reactions

763

Fewer molecules mean fewer possible conﬁgurations. To help clarify this idea, consider
a special container with a million compartments, each large enough to hold a hydrogen
molecule. Thus there are a million ways one H2 molecule can be placed in this container.
But suppose we break the HOH bond and place the two independent H atoms in the
same container. A little thought will convince you that there are many more than a million ways to place the two separate atoms. The number of arrangements possible for
the two independent atoms is much greater than the number for the molecule. Thus for
the process
H2 ¡ 2H
positional entropy increases.
Does positional entropy increase or decrease when the following reaction takes place?
4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2
In this case 9 gaseous molecules are changed to 10 gaseous molecules, and the positional
entropy increases. There are more independent units as products than as reactants. In
general, when a reaction involves gaseous molecules, the change in positional entropy is
dominated by the relative numbers of molecules of gaseous reactants and products. If the
number of molecules of the gaseous products is greater than the number of molecules of
the gaseous reactants, positional entropy typically increases, and ¢S will be positive for
the reaction.

Sample Exercise 16.6

Predicting the Sign of S
Predict the sign of S for each of the following reactions.
a. The thermal decomposition of solid calcium carbonate:
CaCO3 1s2 ¡ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2
b. The oxidation of SO2 in air:
2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2SO3 1g2
Solution
a. Since in this reaction a gas is produced from a solid reactant, the positional entropy
increases, and S is positive.
b. Here three molecules of gaseous reactants become two molecules of gaseous products.
Since the number of gas molecules decreases, positional entropy decreases, and S
is negative.
See Exercises 16.33 and 16.34.
In thermodynamics it is the change in a certain function that is usually important.
The change in enthalpy determines if a reaction is exothermic or endothermic at
constant pressure. The change in free energy determines if a process is spontaneous
at constant temperature and pressure. It is fortunate that changes in thermodynamic
functions are sufﬁcient for most purposes, since absolute values for many ther
modynamic characteristics of a system, such as enthalpy or free energy, cannot be
determined.
However, we can assign absolute entropy values. Consider a solid at 0 K, where
molecular motion virtually ceases. If the substance is a perfect crystal, its internal arrangement is absolutely regular (see Fig. 16.5(a)). There is only one way to achieve this perfect
order: Every particle must be in its place. For example, with N coins there is only one

764

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

–

+

+

–

–

+

–

–

–

+

+

+

–

+

+

–

+

–

+

+

–

–

+

+

+

–

+

–

(a)

+

–

–

–

The standard entropy values represent
the increase in entropy that occurs when
a substance is heated from 0 K to 298 K
at 1 atm pressure.

+

–

A perfect crystal at 0 K is an unattainable
ideal, taken as a standard but never actually observed.

–

+

FIGURE 16.5
(a) A perfect crystal of hydrogen chloride
at 0 K; the dipolar HCl molecules are represented by   . The entropy is zero
(S  0) for this perfect crystal at 0 K.
(b) As the temperature rises above 0 K, lattice vibrations allow some dipoles to change
their orientations, producing some disorder
and an increase in entropy (S 7 0).

+

+

–

(b)

way to achieve the state of all heads. Thus a perfect crystal represents the lowest possible
entropy; that is, the entropy of a perfect crystal at 0 K is zero. This is a statement of the
third law of thermodynamics.
As the temperature of a perfect crystal is increased, the random vibrational motions increase, and disorder increases within the crystal [see Fig. 16.5(b)]. Thus the
entropy of a substance increases with temperature. Since S is zero for a perfect crystal at 0 K, the entropy value for a substance at a particular temperature can be calculated by knowing the temperature dependence of entropy. (We will not show such calculations here.)
The standard entropy values S° of many common substances at 298 K and 1 atm are
listed in Appendix 4. From these values you will see that the entropy of a substance does
indeed increase in going from solid to liquid to gas. One especially interesting feature of
this table is the very low S° value for diamond. The structure of diamond is highly ordered, with each carbon strongly bound to a tetrahedral arrangement of four other carbon
atoms (see Section 10.5, Fig. 10.22). This type of structure allows very little disorder and
has a very low entropy, even at 298 K. Graphite has a slightly higher entropy because its
layered structure allows for a little more disorder.
Because entropy is a state function of the system (it is not pathway-dependent), the
entropy change for a given chemical reaction can be calculated by taking the difference
between the standard entropy values of products and those of the reactants:
¢S°reaction  ©npS°products  ©nr S°reactants
where, as usual, © represents the sum of the terms. It is important to note that entropy
is an extensive property (it depends on the amount of substance present). This means
that the number of moles of a given reactant (nr) or product (np) must be taken into
account.

Sample Exercise 16.7

Calculating S
Calculate ¢S° at 25°C for the reaction
2NiS1s2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2SO2 1g2  2NiO1s2
given the following standard entropy values:

Substance

S° (J/K  mol)

SO2(g)
NiO(s)
O2(g)
NiS(s)

248
38
205
53

16.5 Entropy Changes in Chemical Reactions

765

Solution
Since

¢S°  ©npS°products  ©nr S°reactants
 2S°SO21g2  2S°NiO1s2  2S°NiS1s2  3S°O21s2
J
J
 2 mol a248
b  2 mol a38
b
K  mol
K  mol
J
J
2 mola53
b  3 mol a205
b
K  mol
K  mol
 496 J/K  76 J/K  106 J/K  615 J/K
 149 J/K

We would expect ¢S° to be negative because the number of gaseous molecules decreases
in this reaction.
See Exercise 16.37.

Sample Exercise 16.8

Calculating S°
Calculate ¢S° for the reduction of aluminum oxide by hydrogen gas:
Al2O3 1s2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2Al1s2  3H2O1g2

Use the following standard entropy values:

Substance

S° (J/K  mol)

Al2O3(s)
H2(g)
Al(s)
H2O(g)

51
131
28
189

Solution
¢S°  ©npS°products  ©nr S°reactants
 2S°Al1s2  3S°H2O1g2  3S°H21g2  S°Al2O3 1s2
 2 mol a28

J
J
b  3 mol a189
b
K  mol
K  mol
J
J
3 mol a131
b  1 mol a51
b
K  mol
K  mol
 56 J/K  567 J/K  393 J/K  51 J/K
 179 J/K
See Exercises 16.38 through 16.40.

The reaction considered in Sample Exercise 16.8 involves 3 moles of hydrogen
gas on the reactant side and 3 moles of water vapor on the product side. Would you
expect ¢S to be large or small for such a case? We have assumed that ¢S depends
on the relative numbers of molecules of gaseous reactants and products. Based on
this assumption, ¢S should be near zero for this reaction. However, ¢S is large and

766

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

O

H

H

positive. Why is this so? The large value for ¢S results from the difference in the entropy values for hydrogen gas and water vapor. The reason for this difference can be
traced to the difference in molecular structure. Because it is a nonlinear, triatomic molecule, H2O has more rotational and vibrational motions (see Fig. 16.6) than does the
diatomic H2 molecule. Thus the standard entropy value for H2O(g) is greater than that
for H2(g). Generally, the more complex the molecule, the higher the standard entropy
value.

O

H

H

O
H
H
Vibrations

O
H

H
Rotation

FIGURE 16.6
The H2O molecule can vibrate and rotate in
several ways, some of which are shown
here. This freedom of motion leads to a
higher entropy for water than for a substance like hydrogen, a simple diatomic
molecule with fewer possible motions.

The value of G ° tells us nothing about
the rate of a reaction, only its eventual
equilibrium position.

16.6

Free Energy and Chemical Reactions

For chemical reactions we are often interested in the standard free energy change (¢G°),
the change in free energy that will occur if the reactants in their standard states are converted to the products in their standard states. For example, for the ammonia synthesis
reaction at 25°C,
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2

¢G°  33.3 kJ

(16.1)

This ¢G° value represents the change in free energy when 1 mol nitrogen gas at 1 atm
reacts with 3 mol hydrogen gas at 1 atm to produce 2 mol gaseous NH3 at 1 atm.
It is important to recognize that the standard free energy change for a reaction is not
measured directly. For example, we can measure heat ﬂow in a calorimeter to determine
¢H°, but we cannot measure ¢G° this way. The value of ¢G° for the ammonia synthesis in Equation (16.1) was not obtained by mixing 1 mol N2 and 3 mol H2 in a ﬂask and
measuring the change in free energy as 2 mol NH3 formed. For one thing, if we mixed 1
mol N2 and 3 mol H2 in a ﬂask, the system would go to equilibrium rather than to
completion. Also, we have no instrument that measures free energy. However, while we
cannot directly measure ¢G° for a reaction, we can calculate it from other measured
quantities, as we will see later in this section.
Why is it useful to know ¢G° for a reaction? As we will see in more detail later in
this chapter, knowing the ¢G° values for several reactions allows us to compare the relative tendency of these reactions to occur. The more negative the value of ¢G°, the further a reaction will go to the right to reach equilibrium. We must use standard-state free
energies to make this comparison because free energy varies with pressure or concentration. Thus, to get an accurate comparison of reaction tendencies, we must compare all reactions under the same pressure or concentration conditions. We will have more to say
about the signiﬁcance of ¢G° later.
There are several ways to calculate ¢G°. One common method uses the equation
¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°
which applies to a reaction carried out at constant temperature. For example, for the
reaction
C1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2
the values of ¢H° and ¢S° are known to be 393.5 kJ and 3.05 J/K, respectively, and
¢G° can be calculated at 298 K as follows:
¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°

 3.935  105 J  1298 K2 13.05 J/K2
 3.944  105 J
 394.4 kJ 1per mole of CO2 2

16.6 Free Energy and Chemical Reactions

Sample Exercise 16.9

767

Calculating H°, S°, and G°
Consider the reaction
2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2SO3 1g2
carried out at 25°C and 1 atm. Calculate ¢H°, ¢S°, and ¢G° using the following data:

Substance

 Hf (kJ/mol)

S° (J/K  mol)

SO2(g)
SO3(g)
O2(g)

297
396
0

248
257
205

Solution
The value of H can be calculated from the enthalpies of formation using the equation
we discussed in Section 6.4:
¢H°  ©np ¢H°f 1products2  ©nr ¢H°f 1reactants2
Then

¢H°  2¢H°f 1SO3 1g22  2¢H°f 1SO21g22  ¢H°f 1O2 1g22
 2 mol 1396 kJ/mol2  2 mol 1297 kJ/mol2  0
 792 kJ  594 kJ
 198 kJ

The value of S can be calculated using the standard entropy values and the equation discussed in Section 16.5:
¢S°  ©np S°products  ©nr S°reactants
Thus
¢S°  2S°SO3 1g2  2S°SO2 1g2  S°O2 1g2
 2 mol 1257 J/K  mol2  2 mol 1248 J/K  mol2  1 mol1205 J/K  mol2
 514 J/K  496 J/K  205 J/K
 187 J/K
We would expect S to be negative because three molecules of gaseous reactants give
two molecules of gaseous products.
The value of G can now be calculated from the equation
¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°
 198 kJ  1298 K2 a187

J
1 kJ
ba
b
K 1000 J
 198 kJ  55.7 kJ  142 kJ
See Exercises 16.45 through 16.47.
A second method for calculating ¢G for a reaction takes advantage of the fact that,
like enthalpy, free energy is a state function. Therefore, we can use procedures for ﬁnding ¢G that are similar to those for ﬁnding ¢H using Hess’s law.

768

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
To illustrate this method for calculating the free energy change, we will obtain ¢G°
for the reaction
2CO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2

(16.2)

from the following data:
2CH4 1g2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO1g2  4H2O1g2
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2

¢G°  1088 kJ
¢G°  801 kJ

(16.3)
(16.4)

Note that CO(g) is a reactant in Equation (16.2). This means that Equation (16.3) must
be reversed, since CO(g) is a product in that reaction as written. When a reaction is reversed, the sign of ¢G° is also reversed. In Equation (16.4), CO2(g) is a product, as it is
in Equation (16.2), but only one molecule of CO2 is formed. Thus Equation (16.4) must
be multiplied by 2, which means the ¢G° value for Equation (16.4) also must be multiplied by 2. Free energy is an extensive property, since it is deﬁned by two extensive properties, H and S.
Reversed Equation (16.3)

2CO1g2  4H2O1g2 ¡ 2CH4 1g2  3O2 1g2

¢G°  11088 kJ2

2  Equation (16.4)

2CH4 1g2  4O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  4H2O1g2

¢G°  21801 kJ2

2CO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2

¢G°  11088 kJ2
 21801 kJ2
 514 kJ

This example shows that the ¢G values for reactions are manipulated in exactly the same
way as the ¢H values.
Sample Exercise 16.10

Calculating G°
Using the following data (at 25°C)
Cdiamond 1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2
Cgraphite 1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2
calculate ¢G° for the reaction

¢G°  397 kJ
¢G°  394 kJ

(16.5)
(16.6)

Cdiamond 1s2 ¡ Cgraphite 1s2

Solution
Graphite

We reverse Equation (16.6) to make graphite a product, as required, and then add the new
equation to Equation (16.5):
Cdiamond 1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2

¢G°  397 kJ

Reversed Equation (16.6)

CO2 1g2 ¡ Cgraphite 1s2  O2 1g2

Cdiamond 1s2 ¡ Cgraphite 1s2

¢G°  1394 kJ2
¢G°  397 kJ  394 kJ
 3 kJ

Diamond

Since ¢G° is negative for this process, diamond should spontaneously change to
graphite at 25°C and 1 atm. However, the reaction is so slow under these conditions that
we do not observe the process. This is another example of kinetic rather than thermodynamic control of a reaction. We can say that diamond is kinetically stable with respect to
graphite even though it is thermodynamically unstable.
See Exercises 16.51 and 16.52.

16.6 Free Energy and Chemical Reactions

769

In Sample Exercise 16.10 we saw that the process
Cdiamond 1s2 ¡ Cgraphite 1s2

The standard state of an element is its
most stable state of 25°C and 1 atm.

is spontaneous but very slow at 25°C and 1 atm. The reverse process can be made to occur at high temperatures and pressures. Diamond has a more compact structure and thus
a higher density than graphite, so exerting very high pressure causes it to become thermodynamically favored. If high temperatures are also used to make the process fast enough
to be feasible, diamonds can be made from graphite. The conditions typically used involve temperatures greater than 1000°C and pressures of about 105 atm. About half of all
industrial diamonds are made this way.
A third method for calculating the free energy change for a reaction uses standard
free energies of formation. The standard free energy of formation ( Gf ) of a substance
is deﬁned as the change in free energy that accompanies the formation of 1 mole of that
substance from its constituent elements with all reactants and products in their standard
states. For the formation of glucose (C6H12O6), the appropriate reaction is
6C1s2  6H2 1g2  3O2 1g2 ¡ C6H12O6 1s2

The standard free energy associated with this process is called the free energy of formation of glucose. Values of the standard free energy of formation are useful in calculating
¢G° for speciﬁc chemical reactions using the equation
Calculating G° is very similar to calculating H°, as shown in Section 6.4.

Sample Exercise 16.11

¢G°  ©np ¢Gf° 1products2  ©nr ¢Gf° 1reactants2
Values of ¢Gf° for many common substances are listed in Appendix 4. Note that,
analogous to the enthalpy of formation, the standard free energy of formation of an element in its standard state is zero. Also note that the number of moles of each reactant (nr)
and product (np) must be used when calculating ¢G° for a reaction.

Calculating G°
Methanol is a high-octane fuel used in high-performance racing engines. Calculate ¢G°
for the reaction
2CH3OH1g2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  4H2O1g2
given the following free energies of formation:

Substance

G°f (kJ/mol)

CH3OH(g)
O2(g)
CO2(g)
H2O(g)

163
0
394
229

Solution
We use the equation
¢G°  ©np ¢G°f 1products2  ©nr ¢G°f 1reactants2
 2¢G°f 1CO21g22  4¢G°f 1H2O1g22  3¢G°f 1O21g22  2¢G°f 1CH3OH1g22
 2 mol1394 kJ/mol2  4 mol1229 kJ/mol2  3102
2 mol1163 kJ/mol2
 1378 kJ

770

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
The large magnitude and the negative sign of ¢G° indicate that this reaction is very favorable thermodynamically.
See Exercises 16.53 through 16.55.
Sample Exercise 16.12

Free Energy and Spontaneity
A chemical engineer wants to determine the feasibility of making ethanol (C2H5OH) by
reacting water with ethylene (C2H4) according to the equation
C2H4 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ C2H5OH1l2

Is this reaction spontaneous under standard conditions?
Ethylene

Solution
To determine the spontaneity of this reaction under standard conditions, we must determine ¢G° for the reaction. We can do this using standard free energies of formation at
25° from Appendix 4:
¢Gf° 1C2H5OH1l22  175 kJ/mol
¢Gf° 1H2O1l22  237 kJ/mol
¢Gf° 1C2H41g22  68 kJ/mol
Then

Ethanol

¢G°  ¢Gf° 1C2H5OH1l22  ¢Gf° 1H2O1l22  ¢Gf° 1C2H41g22
 175 kJ  1237 kJ2  68 kJ
 6 kJ

Thus the process is spontaneous under standard conditions at 25°C.
See Exercise 16.56.
Although the reaction considered in Sample Exercise 16.12 is spontaneous, other
features of the reaction must be studied to see if the process is feasible. For example,
the chemical engineer will need to study the kinetics of the reaction to determine whether
it is fast enough to be useful and, if it is not, whether a catalyst can be found to enhance
the rate. In doing these studies, the engineer must remember that ¢G° depends on
temperature:
¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°
Thus, if the process must be carried out at high temperatures to be fast enough to be feasible, ¢G° must be recalculated at that temperature from the ¢H° and ¢S° values for the
reaction.

16.7

The Dependence of Free Energy on Pressure

In this chapter we have seen that a system at constant temperature and pressure will
proceed spontaneously in the direction that lowers its free energy. This is why reactions
proceed until they reach equilibrium. As we will see later in this section, the equilibrium position represents the lowest free energy value available to a particular reaction
system. The free energy of a reaction system changes as the reaction proceeds, because
free energy is dependent on the pressure of a gas or on the concentration of species in
solution. We will deal only with the pressure dependence of the free energy of an ideal
gas. The dependence of free energy on concentration can be developed using similar
reasoning.

16.7 The Dependence of Free Energy on Pressure

771

To understand the pressure dependence of free energy, we need to know how pressure affects the thermodynamic functions that comprise free energy, that is, enthalpy and
entropy (recall that G  H  TS). For an ideal gas, enthalpy is not pressure-dependent.
However, entropy does depend on pressure because of its dependence on volume. Consider 1 mole of an ideal gas at a given temperature. At a volume of 10.0 L, the gas has
many more positions available for its molecules than if its volume is 1.0 L. The positional
entropy is greater in the larger volume. In summary, at a given temperature for 1 mole of
ideal gas
Slarge volume 7 Ssmall volume
or, since pressure and volume are inversely related,
Slow pressure 7 Shigh pressure
We have shown qualitatively that the entropy and therefore the free energy of an ideal
gas depend on its pressure. Using a more detailed argument, which we will not consider
here, it can be shown that
G  G°  RT ln1P2
where G° is the free energy of the gas at a pressure of 1 atm, G is the free energy of
the gas at a pressure of P atm, R is the universal gas constant, and T is the Kelvin
temperature.
To see how the change in free energy for a reaction depends on pressure, we will consider the ammonia synthesis reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
¢G  ©npGproducts  ©nrGreactants

For this reaction

¢G  2GNH3  GN2  3GH2

GNH3  G°NH3  RT ln1PNH3 2
GN2  G°N2  RT ln1PN2 2
GH2  G°H2  RT ln1PH2 2

where

Substituting these values into the equation gives
¢G  23G°NH3  RT ln1PNH3 2 4  3G°N2  RT ln1PN2 2 4  33G°H2  RT ln1PH2 2 4
 2G°NH3  G°N2  3G°H2  2RT ln1PNH3 2  RT ln1PN2 2  3RT ln1PH2 2
 12G°NH3  G°N2  3G°H2 2  RT 32 ln1PNH3 2  ln1PN2 2  3 ln1PH2 2 4
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

See Appendix 1.2 to review logarithms.

In general,

G reaction

The ﬁrst term (in parentheses) is ¢G° for the reaction. Thus we have
¢G  ¢G°reaction  RT 32 ln1PNH3 2  ln 1PN2 2  3 ln1PH2 2 4
and since

2 ln 1PNH3 2  ln 1PNH32 2
ln 1PN2 2  ln a

3 ln1PH2 2  ln a

1
b
PN2

1
b
PH23

the equation becomes
¢G  ¢G°  RT lna

PNH32

1PN2 2 1PH23 2

b

772

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
PNH32

1PN2 21PH23 2

But the term

is the reaction quotient Q discussed in Section 13.5. Therefore, we have
¢G  ¢G°  RT ln 1Q2
where Q is the reaction quotient (from the law of mass action), T is the temperature
(K), R is the gas law constant and is equal to 8.3145 J/K  mol, ¢G° is the free energy
change for the reaction with all reactants and products at a pressure of 1 atm, and ¢G
is the free energy change for the reaction for the speciﬁed pressures of reactants and
products.

Sample Exercise 16.13

Calculating G°
One method for synthesizing methanol (CH3OH) involves reacting carbon monoxide and
hydrogen gases:
CO1g2  2H2 1g2 ¡ CH3OH1l2
Calculate ¢G at 25°C for this reaction where carbon monoxide gas at 5.0 atm and hydrogen gas at 3.0 atm are converted to liquid methanol.
Solution
To calculate ¢G for this process, we use the equation

¢G  ¢G°  RT ln 1Q2

We must ﬁrst compute ¢G° from standard free energies of formation (see Appendix 4).
Since
¢G°f 1CH3OH 1l22
¢G°f 1H2 1g22
¢G°f 1CO 1g22
¢G°  166 kJ  1137 kJ2  0

 166 kJ
0
 137 kJ
 29 kJ  2.9  104 J

Note that this is the value of ¢G° for the reaction of 1 mol CO with 2 mol H2 to
produce 1 mol CH3OH. We might call this the value of ¢G° for one “round” of the reaction or for one mole of the reaction. Thus the ¢G° value might better be written as
2.9  104 J/mol of reaction, or 2.9  104 J/mol rxn.
We can now calculate ¢G using
Note in this case that G is deﬁned for
“one mole of the reaction,” that is, for 1
mol CO(g) reacting with 2 mol H2(g) to
form 1 mol CH3OH(l ). Thus G, G º, and
RT ln(Q) all have units of J/mol of reaction. In this case the units of R are actually J/K  mol of reaction, although they
are usually not written this way.

¢G°  2.9  104 J/mol rxn
R  8.3145 J/K  mol
T  273  25  298 K
Q

1
1
 2.2  102
2 
1PCO 2 1PH2 2
15.02 13.02 2

Note that the pure liquid methanol is not included in the calculation of Q. Then
¢G  ¢G°  RT ln 1Q2
 12.9  104 J/mol rxn2  18.3145 J/K  mol rxn2 1298 K2 ln 12.2  102 2
 12.9  104 J/mol rxn2  19.4  103 J/mol rxn2  3.8  104 J/mol rxn
 38 kJ/mol rxn

16.7 The Dependence of Free Energy on Pressure

773

Note that ¢G is signiﬁcantly more negative than ¢G°, implying that the reaction is
more spontaneous at reactant pressures greater than 1 atm. We might expect this result
from Le Châtelier’s principle.
See Exercises 16.57 and 16.58.

The Meaning of G for a Chemical Reaction
In this section we have learned to calculate ¢G for chemical reactions under various conditions. For example, in Sample Exercise 16.13 the calculations show that the formation
of CH3OH(l) from CO(g) at 5.0 atm reacting with H2(g) at 3.0 atm is spontaneous. What
does this result mean? Does it mean that if we mixed 1.0 mol CO(g) and 2.0 mol H2(g)
together at pressures of 5.0 and 3.0 atm, respectively, that 1.0 mol CH3OH(l) would form
in the reaction ﬂask? The answer is no. This answer may surprise you in view of what
has been said in this section. It is true that 1.0 mol CH3OH(l) has a lower free energy than
1.0 mol CO(g) at 5.0 atm plus 2.0 mol H2(g) at 3.0 atm. However, when CO(g) and H2(g)
are mixed under these conditions, there is an even lower free energy available to this system than 1.0 mol pure CH3OH(l). For reasons we will discuss shortly, the system can
achieve the lowest possible free energy by going to equilibrium, not by going to completion. At the equilibrium position, some of the CO(g) and H2(g) will remain in the reaction ﬂask. So even though 1.0 mol pure CH3OH(l) is at a lower free energy than 1.0 mol
CO(g) and 2.0 mol H2(g) at 5.0 and 3.0 atm, respectively, the reaction system will stop
short of forming 1.0 mol CH3OH(l). The reaction stops short of completion because the
equilibrium mixture of CH3OH(l), CO(g), and H2(g) exists at the lowest possible free
energy available to the system.
To illustrate this point, we will explore a mechanical example. Consider balls rolling
down the two hills shown in Fig. 16.7. Note that in both cases point B has a lower potential energy than point A.
In Fig. 16.7(a) the ball will roll to point B. This diagram is analogous to a phase
change. For example, at 25°C ice will spontaneously change completely to liquid water,
because the latter has the lowest free energy. In this case liquid water is the only choice.
There is no intermediate mixture of ice and water with lower free energy.
The situation is different for a chemical reaction system, as illustrated in Fig. 16.7(b).
In Fig. 16.7(b) the ball will not get to point B because there is a lower potential energy
at point C. Like the ball, a chemical system will seek the lowest possible free energy,
which, for reasons we will discuss below, is the equilibrium position.
Therefore, although the value of ¢G for a given reaction system tells us whether the
products or reactants are favored under a given set of conditions, it does not mean that
the system will proceed to pure products (if ¢G is negative) or remain at pure reactants
(if ¢G is positive). Instead, the system will spontaneously go to the equilibrium position,

A

A

B

FIGURE 16.7
Schematic representations of balls rolling
down two types of hills.

B
C

(a)

(b)

774

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
the lowest possible free energy available to it. In the next section we will see that the value
of ¢G° for a particular reaction tells us exactly where this position will be.

16.8
GA
G
GB
(a)
GA (PA decreasing)
G

GB (PB increasing)

Free Energy and Equilibrium

When the components of a given chemical reaction are mixed, they will proceed, rapidly
or slowly depending on the kinetics of the process, to the equilibrium position. In Chapter 13 we deﬁned the equilibrium position as the point at which the forward and reverse
reaction rates are equal. In this chapter we look at equilibrium from a thermodynamic
point of view, and we ﬁnd that the equilibrium point occurs at the lowest value of free
energy available to the reaction system. As it turns out, the two deﬁnitions give the same
equilibrium state, which must be the case for both the kinetic and thermodynamic models to be valid.
To understand the relationship of free energy to equilibrium, let’s consider the following simple hypothetical reaction:
A 1g2 ∆ B 1g2

(b)

GA

GB

where 1.0 mole of gaseous A is initially placed in a reaction vessel at a pressure of 2.0
atm. The free energies for A and B are diagramed as shown in Fig. 16.8(a). As A reacts
to form B, the total free energy of the system changes, yielding the following results:
Free energy of A  GA  G°A  RT ln 1PA 2
Free energy of B  GB  G°B  RT ln 1PB 2
Total free energy of system  G  GA  GB

G

(c)

FIGURE 16.8
(a) The initial free energies of A and B.
(b) As A(g) changes to B(g), the free
energy of A decreases and that of B
increases. (c) Eventually, pressures of
A and B are achieved such that GA  GB,
the equilibrium position.

As A changes to B, GA will decrease because PA is decreasing [Fig. 16.8(b)]. In contrast,
GB will increase because PB is increasing. The reaction will proceed to the right as long
as the total free energy of the system decreases (as long as GB is less than GA). At some
point the pressures of A and B reach the values P eA and P eB that make GA equal to GB.
The system has reached equilibrium [Fig. 16.8(c)]. Since A at pressure P eA and B at pressure P eB have the same free energy (GA equals GB), G is zero for A at pressure P eA changing to B at pressure P eB. The system has reached minimum free energy. There is no longer
any driving force to change A to B or B to A, so the system remains at this position (the
pressures of A and B remain constant).
Suppose that for the experiment described above the plot of free energy versus the
mole fraction of A reacted is deﬁned as shown in Fig. 16.9(a). In this experiment, minimum free energy is reached when 75% of A has been changed to B. At this point, the
pressure of A is 0.25 times the original pressure, or
10.25212.0 atm2  0.50 atm
The pressure of B is
10.75212.0 atm2  1.5 atm

FIGURE 16.9
(a) The change in free energy to reach equilibrium, beginning with 1.0 mol A(g) at
PA  2.0 atm. (b) The change in free
energy to reach equilibrium, beginning with
1.0 mol B(g) at PB  2.0 atm. (c) The free
energy proﬁle for A(g) ∆ B(g) in a
system containing 1.0 mol (A plus B) at
PTOTAL  2.0 atm. Each point on the curve
corresponds to the total free energy of the
system for a given combination of A and B.

Equilibrium
occurs here
G

G

0
(a)

Equilibrium
occurs here

0.5
1.0
Fraction of A reacted

G

0
(b)

Equilibrium
occurs here

0.5
1.0
Fraction of A reacted

0
(c)

0.5
1.0
Fraction of A reacted

16.8 Free Energy and Equilibrium

775

Since this is the equilibrium position, we can use the equilibrium pressures to calculate a
value for K for the reaction in which A is converted to B at this temperature:
PBe
1.5 atm

 3.0
PAe
0.50 atm

K
For the reaction A(g) ∆ B(g), the
pressure is constant during the reaction,
since the same number of gas molecules
is always present.

Exactly the same equilibrium point would be achieved if we placed 1.0 mol pure B(g)
in the ﬂask at a pressure of 2.0 atm. In this case B would change to A until equilibrium
(GB  GA ) is reached. This is shown in Fig. 16.9(b).
The overall free energy curve for this system is shown in Fig. 16.9(c). Note that any
mixture of A(g) and B(g) containing 1.0 mol (A plus B) at a total pressure of 2.0 atm will
react until it reaches the minimum in the curve.
In summary, when substances undergo a chemical reaction, the reaction proceeds to
the minimum free energy (equilibrium), which corresponds to the point where
Gproducts  Greactants or

¢G  Gproducts  Greactants  0

We can now establish a quantitative relationship between free energy and the value
of the equilibrium constant. We have seen that
¢G  ¢G°  RT ln1Q2
and at equilibrium ¢G equals 0 and Q equals K.
¢G  0  ¢G°  RT ln 1K2

So

¢G°  RT ln 1K2

or

We must note the following characteristics of this very important equation.
Case 1: G  0. When G equals zero for a particular reaction, the free energies
of the reactants and products are equal when all components are in the standard states
(1 atm for gases). The system is at equilibrium when the pressures of all reactants
and products are 1 atm, which means that K equals 1.
Case 2:
that

G 6 0. In this case

G (Gproducts  Greactants) is negative, which means
G°products 6 G°reactants

If a ﬂask contains the reactants and products, all at 1 atm, the system will not be at
equilibrium. Since G°products is less than G°reactants, the system will adjust to the right to
reach equilibrium. In this case K will be greater than 1, since the pressures of the
products at equilibrium will be greater than 1 atm and the pressures of the reactants
at equilibrium will be less than 1 atm.
Case 3: ¢G° 7 0. Since ¢G° 1G°products  G°reactants 2 is positive,
G°reactants 6 G°products
TABLE 16.6 Qualitative
Relationship Between the
Change in Standard Free Energy
and the Equilibrium Constant
for a Given Reaction
G°

K

¢G°  0
¢G° 6 0
¢G° 7 0

K1
K 7 1
K 6 1

If a ﬂask contains the reactants and products, all at 1 atm, the system will not be at
equilibrium. In this case the system will adjust to the left (toward the reactants, which
have a lower free energy) to reach equilibrium. The value of K will be less than 1,
since at equilibrium the pressures of the reactants will be greater than 1 atm and the
pressures of the products will be less than 1 atm.
These results are summarized in Table 16.6. The value of K for a speciﬁc reaction
can be calculated from the equation
¢G°  RT ln 1K2
as is shown in Sample Exercises 16.14 and 16.15.

776

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

Sample Exercise 16.14

Free Energy and Equilibrium I
Consider the ammonia synthesis reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
where ¢G°  33.3 kJ per mole of N2 consumed at 25°C. For each of the following
mixtures of reactants and products at 25°C, predict the direction in which the system will
shift to reach equilibrium.
a. PNH3  1.00 atm, PN2  1.47 atm, PH2  1.00  102 atm
b. PNH3  1.00 atm, PN2  1.00 atm, PH2  1.00 atm
Solution
a. We can predict the direction of reaction to equilibrium by calculating the value of ¢G
using the equation

The units of G, G°, and RT ln (Q) all
refer to the balanced reaction with all
amounts expressed in moles. We might
say that the units are joules per “mole of
reaction,” although only the “per mole” is
indicated for R (as is customary).

¢G  ¢G°  RT ln 1Q2
2

where

Q

PNH3



11.002 2

1PN2 21PH23 2
11.47211.00  102 2 3
T  25  273  298 K
R  8.3145 J/K  mol

 6.80  105

and
¢G°  33.3 kJ/mol  3.33  104 J/mol
Then
¢G  13.33  104 J/mol2  18.3145 J/K  mol2 1298 K2 ln 16.8  105 2
 13.33  104 J/mol2  13.33  104 J/mol2  0
Since ¢G  0, the reactants and products have the same free energies at these partial
pressures. The system is already at equilibrium, and no shift will occur.
b. The partial pressures given here are all 1.00 atm, which means that the system is in
the standard state. That is,
¢G  ¢G°  RT ln 1Q2  ¢G°  RT ln

11.002 2

11.002 11.002 3

 ¢G°  RT ln 11.002  ¢G°  0  ¢G°
For this reaction at 25°C,
¢G°  33.3 kJ/mol

The negative value for ¢G° means that in their standard states the products have a
lower free energy than the reactants. Thus the system will move to the right to reach
equilibrium. That is, K is greater than 1.
See Exercise 16.59.

Sample Exercise 16.15

Free Energy and Equilibrium II
The overall reaction for the corrosion (rusting) of iron by oxygen is
4Fe1s2  3O2 1g2 ∆ 2Fe2O3 1s2

16.8 Free Energy and Equilibrium

777

Using the following data, calculate the equilibrium constant for this reaction at 25°C.

Substance
Fe2O3(s)
Fe(s)
O2(g)

Hf (kJ/mol)

S° (J/K  mol)

826
0
0

90
27
205

Solution
To calculate K for this reaction, we will use the equation
¢G°  RT ln1K2
We must ﬁrst calculate ¢G° from
¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°
where
¢H°  2¢H°f 1Fe2O31s22  3¢H°f 1O21g22  4¢H°f 1Fe1s22
 2 mol1826 kJ/mol2  0  0
 1652 kJ  1.652  106 J
¢S°  2S°Fe2O3  3S°O2  4S°Fe
 2 mol190 J/K  mol2  3 mol1205 J/K  mol2  4 mol127 J/K  mol2
 543 J/K
T  273  25  298 K

and
Then

¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°  11.652  106 J2  1298 K21543 J/K2
 1.490  106 J

and
¢G°  RT ln1K2  1.490  106 J  18.3145 J/K  mol21298 K2 ln1K2
Thus

ln1K2 

K  e601

and
Formation of rust on bare steel is a spontaneous process.

1.490  106
 601
2.48  103

This is a very large equilibrium constant. The rusting of iron is clearly very favorable from
a thermodynamic point of view.
See Exercise 16.62.

The Temperature Dependence of K
In Chapter 13 we used Le Châtelier’s principle to predict qualitatively how the value of K
for a given reaction would change with a change in temperature. Now we can specify the
quantitative dependence of the equilibrium constant on temperature from the relationship
¢G°  RT ln1K2  ¢H°  T¢S°
We can rearrange this equation to give
ln1K2  

¢H°
¢S°
¢H° 1
¢S°


a b
RT
R
R T
R

778

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy
Note that this is a linear equation of the form y  mx  b, where y  ln(K), m   HR 
slope, x  1T, and b  S R  intercept. This means that if values of K for a given reaction are determined at various temperatures, a plot of ln(K) versus 1T will be linear,
with slope  HR and intercept SR. This result assumes that both H and S are
independent of temperature over the temperature range considered. This assumption is a
good approximation over a relatively small temperature range.

16.9

Free Energy and Work

One of the main reasons we are interested in physical and chemical processes is that we
want to use them to do work for us, and we want this work done as efﬁciently and economically as possible. We have already seen that at constant temperature and pressure,
the sign of the change in free energy tells us whether a given process is spontaneous. This
is very useful information because it prevents us from wasting effort on a process that has
no inherent tendency to occur. Although a thermodynamically favorable chemical reaction may not occur to any appreciable extent because it is too slow, it makes sense in this
case to try to ﬁnd a catalyst to speed up the reaction. On the other hand, if the reaction
is prevented from occurring by its thermodynamic characteristics, we would be wasting
our time looking for a catalyst.
In addition to its qualitative usefulness (telling us whether a process is spontaneous),
the change in free energy is important quantitatively because it can tell us how much
work can be done with a given process. In fact, the maximum possible useful work obtainable from a process at constant temperature and pressure is equal to the change in
free energy:
wmax  ¢G
Note that “PV work” is not counted as
useful work here.

This relationship explains why this function is called the free energy. Under certain conditions, ¢G for a spontaneous process represents the energy that is free to do useful work.
On the other hand, for a process that is not spontaneous, the value of ¢G tells us the minimum amount of work that must be expended to make the process occur.
Knowing the value of ¢G for a process thus gives us valuable information about how
close the process is to 100% efﬁciency. For example, when gasoline is burned in a car’s
engine, the work produced is about 20% of the maximum work available.
For reasons we will only brieﬂy introduce in this book, the amount of work we
actually obtain from a spontaneous process is always less than the maximum possible
amount.
To explore this idea more fully, let’s consider an electric current ﬂowing through
the starter motor of a car. The current is generated from a chemical change in a battery,
and we can calculate ¢G for the battery reaction and so determine the energy available
to do work. Can we use all this energy to do work? No, because a current ﬂowing
through a wire causes frictional heating, and the greater the current, the greater the heat.
This heat represents wasted energy—it is not useful for running the starter motor. We
can minimize this energy waste by running very low currents through the motor circuit.
However, zero current ﬂow would be necessary to eliminate frictional heating entirely,
and we cannot derive any work from the motor if no current ﬂows. This represents the
difﬁculty in which nature places us. Using a process to do work requires that some of
the energy be wasted, and usually the faster we run the process, the more energy we
waste.
Achieving the maximum work available from a spontaneous process can occur only
via a hypothetical pathway. Any real pathway wastes energy. If we could discharge the
battery inﬁnitely slowly by an inﬁnitesimal current ﬂow, we would achieve the maximum
useful work. Also, if we could then recharge the battery using an inﬁnitesimally small

16.9 Free Energy and Work

779

Starter motor

Alternator
w2

FIGURE 16.10
A battery can do work by sending current
to a starter motor. The battery can then be
recharged by forcing current through it in
the opposite direction. If the current ﬂow
in both processes is inﬁnitesimally small,
w1  w2. This is a reversible process. But if
the current ﬂow is ﬁnite, as it would be in
any real case, w2 7 w1. This is an irreversible process (the universe is different
after the cyclic process occurs). All real
processes are irreversible.

w1
Battery is charged
(energy flows into
the battery)

Discharge of battery
(energy flows out of
the battery)
Battery

State 1:
Fully charged

Work (w1) flows
to starter

State 2:
Discharged

Work (w2) flows
to battery

State 1:
Fully charged

current, exactly the same amount of energy would be used to return the battery to its
original state. After we cycle the battery in this way, the universe (the system and
surroundings) is exactly the same as it was before the cyclic process. This is a reversible
process (see Fig. 16.10).
However, if the battery is discharged to run the starter motor and then recharged using a ﬁnite current ﬂow, as is the case in reality, more work will always be required to
recharge the battery than the battery produces as it discharges. This means that even though
the battery (the system) has returned to its original state, the surroundings have not, because the surroundings had to furnish a net amount of work as the battery was cycled.
The universe is different after this cyclic process is performed, and this function is called
an irreversible process. All real processes are irreversible.
In general, after any real cyclic process is carried out in a system, the surroundings
have less ability to do work and contain more thermal energy. In other words, in any real
cyclic process in the system, work is changed to heat in the surroundings, and the entropy
of the universe increases. This is another way of stating the second law of thermodynamics.
Thus thermodynamics tells us the work potential of a process and then tells us that
we can never achieve this potential. In this spirit, thermodynamicist Henry Bent has paraphrased the ﬁrst two laws of thermodynamics as follows:
First law: You can’t win, you can only break even.
Second law: You can’t break even.
When energy is used to do work, it becomes less organized and less concentrated and thus less useful.

The ideas we have discussed in this section are applicable to the energy crisis that
will probably increase in severity over the next 25 years. The crisis is obviously not one
of supply; the ﬁrst law tells us that the universe contains a constant supply of energy. The
problem is the availability of useful energy. As we use energy, we degrade its usefulness.
For example, when gasoline reacts with oxygen in the combustion reaction, the change in
potential energy results in heat ﬂow. Thus the energy concentrated in the bonds of the
gasoline and oxygen molecules ends up spread over the surroundings as thermal energy,
where it is much more difﬁcult to harness for useful work. This is a way in which the
entropy of the universe increases: Concentrated energy becomes spread out—more disordered and less useful. Thus the crux of the energy problem is that we are rapidly consuming
the concentrated energy found in fossil fuels. It took millions of years to concentrate the
sun’s energy in these fuels, and we will consume these same fuels in a few hundred years.
Thus we must use these energy sources as wisely as possible.

780

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

Key Terms

For Review

Section 16.1
spontaneous process
entropy
positional probability

Section 16.2
second law of thermodynamics

Section 16.4
free energy

Section 16.5
third law of thermodynamics

Section 16.6
standard free energy change
standard free energy of formation

Section 16.8
equilibrium point (thermodynamic
deﬁnition)

First law of thermodynamics
䊉 States that the energy of the universe is constant
䊉 Provides a way to keep track of energy as it changes form
䊉 Gives no information about why a particular process occurs in a given direction
Second law of thermodynamics
䊉 States that for any spontaneous process there is always an increase in the entropy
of the universe
䊉 Entropy(S) is a thermodynamic function that describes the number of arrangements
(positions and/or energy levels) available to a system existing in a given state
• Nature spontaneously proceeds toward states that have the highest probability of
occurring
• Using entropy, thermodynamics can predict the direction in which a process will
occur spontaneously
¢Suniv  ¢Ssys  ¢Ssurr

Section 16.9
reversible process
irreversible process

• For a spontaneous process, ¢Suniv must be positive
• For a process at constant temperature and pressure:
• ¢Ssys is dominated by “positional” entropy
For a chemical reaction, ¢Ssys is dominated by changes in the number of
gaseous molecules
• ¢Ssurr is determined by heat:
¢Ssurr  

䊉

¢H
T

¢Ssurr is positive for an exothermic process ( ¢H is negative)
Because ¢Ssurr depends inversely on T, exothermicity becomes a more important driving force at low temperatures
Thermodynamics cannot predict the rate at which a system will spontaneously
change; the principles of kinetics are necessary to do this

Third law of thermodynamics
䊉 States that the entropy of a perfect crystal at 0 K is zero
Free energy (G)
䊉 Free energy is a state function:
G  H  TS
䊉

䊉

䊉

A process occurring at constant temperature and pressure is spontaneous in the
direction in which its free energy decreases (¢G 6 0)
For a reaction the standard free energy change (¢G°) is the change in free energy that occurs when reactants in their standard states are converted to products
in their standard states
The standard free energy change for a reaction can be determined from the standard free energies of formation (¢G°f ) of the reactants and products:
¢G°  ©np ¢G°f 1products2  ©nr ¢G°f 1reactants2

䊉

Free energy depends on temperature and pressure:
G  G°  RT ln P

For Review

781

• This relationship can be used to derive the relationship between ¢G° for a
reaction and the value of its equilibrium constant K:
¢G°  RT ln K

䊉

• For ¢G°  0, K  1
• For ¢G° 6 0, K 7 1
• For ¢G° 7 0, K 6 1
The maximum possible useful work obtainable from a process at constant temperature and pressure is equal to the change in free energy:
wmax  ¢G
• In any real process, w 6 wmax
• When energy is used to do work in a real process, the energy of the universe
remains constant but the usefulness of the energy decreases
• Concentrated energy is spread out in the surroundings as thermal energy

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Deﬁne the following:
a. spontaneous process
b. entropy
c. positional probability
d. system
e. surroundings
f. universe
2. What is the second law of thermodynamics? For any process, there are four possible sign combinations for ¢Ssys and ¢Ssurr. Which sign combination(s) always
give a spontaneous process? Which sign combination(s) always give a nonspontaneous process? Which sign combination(s) may or may not give a spontaneous
process?
3. What determines ¢Ssurr for a process? To calculate ¢Ssurr at constant pressure
and temperature, we use the following equation: ¢Ssurr  ¢H T . Why does a
minus sign appear in the equation, and why is ¢Ssurr inversely proportional to
temperature?
4. The free energy change, ¢G, for a process at constant temperature and pressure
is related to ¢Suniv and reﬂects the spontaneity of the process. How is ¢G related to ¢Suniv? When is a process spontaneous? Nonspontaneous? At equilibrium? ¢G is a composite term composed of ¢H , T, and ¢S. What is the ¢G
equation? Give the four possible sign combinations for ¢H and ¢S. What temperatures are required for each sign combination to yield a spontaneous
process? If ¢G is positive, what does it say about the reverse process? How
does the ¢G  ¢H  T¢S equation reduce when at the melting-point temperature of a solid-to-liquid phase change or at the boiling-point temperature of a
liquid-to-gas phase change? What is the sign of ¢G for the solid-to-liquid
phase change at temperatures above the freezing point? What is the sign of ¢G
for the liquid-to-gas phase change at temperatures below the boiling point?
5. What is the third law of thermodynamics? What are standard entropy values, S°,
and how are these S° values (listed in Appendix 4) used to calculate ¢S° for a
reaction? How would you use Hess’s law to calculate ¢S° for a reaction? What
does the superscript ° indicate?
Predicting the sign of ¢S° for a reaction is an important skill to master. For
a gas-phase reaction, what do you concentrate on to predict the sign of ¢S°?
For a phase change, what do you concentrate on to predict the sign of ¢S°?

782

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

That is, how are S°solid, S°liquid, and S°gas related to one another? When a solute
dissolves in water, what is usually the sign of ¢S° for this process?
What is the standard free energy change, ¢G°, for a reaction? What is the standard free energy of formation, ¢G°f, for a substance? How are ¢G°f values used
to calculate ¢G°rxn? How can you use Hess’s law to calculate ¢G°rxn? How can
you use ¢H° and ¢S° values to calculate ¢G°rxn? Of the functions ¢H°, ¢S°,
and ¢G°, which depends most strongly on temperature? When ¢G° is calculated at temperatures other than 25°C, what assumptions are generally made
concerning ¢H° and ¢S°?
If you calculate a value for ¢G° for a reaction using the values of ¢G°f in Appendix 4 and get a negative number, is it correct to say that the reaction is
always spontaneous? Why or why not? Free energy changes also depend on
concentration. For gases, how is G related to the pressure of the gas? What are
standard pressures for gases and standard concentrations for solutes? How do
you calculate ¢G for a reaction at nonstandard conditions? The equation to
determine ¢G at nonstandard conditions has Q in it: What is Q? A reaction is
spontaneous as long as ¢G is negative; that is, reactions always proceed as
long as the products have a lower free energy than the reactants. What is so
special about equilibrium? Why don’t reactions move away from equilibrium?
Consider the equation ¢G  ¢G°  RT ln(Q) . What is the value of ¢G for a
reaction at equilibrium? What does Q equal at equilibrium? At equilibrium, the
previous equation reduces to ¢G°  RT ln(K) . When ¢G° 7 0, what does
it indicate about K? When ¢G° 6 0, what does it indicate about K? When
¢G°  0, what does it indicate about K? ¢G predicts spontaneity for a reaction,
whereas ¢G° predicts the equilibrium position. Explain what this statement
means. Under what conditions can you use ¢G° to determine the spontaneity
of a reaction?
Even if ¢G is negative, the reaction may not occur. Explain the interplay between the thermodynamics and the kinetics of a reaction. High temperatures are
favorable to a reaction kinetically but may be unfavorable to a reaction thermodynamically. Explain.
Discuss the relationship between wmax and the magnitude and sign of the free
energy change for a reaction. Also discuss wmax for real processes. What is a
reversible process?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. For the process A(l) ¡ A(g) , which direction is favored by
changes in energy probability? Positional probability? Explain
your answers. If you wanted to favor the process as written, would
you raise or lower the temperature of the system? Explain.
2. For a liquid, which would you expect to be larger, ¢ Sfusion or
¢ Sevaporation? Why?
3. Gas A2 reacts with gas B2 to form gas AB at a constant temperature. The bond energy of AB is much greater than that of either

reactant. What can be said about the sign of ¢ H? ¢ Ssurr? ¢ S? Explain how potential energy changes for this process. Explain how
random kinetic energy changes during the process.
4. What types of experiments can be carried out to determine whether
a reaction is spontaneous? Does spontaneity have any relationship
to the ﬁnal equilibrium position of a reaction? Explain.
5. A friend tells you, “Free energy G and pressure P are related by
the equation G  G°  RT ln(P) . Also, G is related to the equilibrium constant K in that when Gproducts  Greactants, the system is
at equilibrium. Therefore, it must be true that a system is at equilibrium when all the pressures are equal.” Do you agree with this
friend? Explain.
6. You remember that ¢G° is related to RT ln(K) but cannot remember if it’s RT ln(K) or RT ln(K). Realizing what ¢G° and K
mean, how can you ﬁgure out the correct sign?

Exercises
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
7. The synthesis of glucose directly from CO2 and H2O and the synthesis of proteins directly from amino acids are both nonspontaneous processes under standard conditions. Yet it is necessary for
these to occur for life to exist. In light of the second law of thermodynamics, how can life exist?
8. When the environment is contaminated by a toxic or potentially
toxic substance (for example, from a chemical spill or the use of
insecticides), the substance tends to disperse. How is this consistent with the second law of thermodynamics? In terms of the second law, which requires the least work: cleaning the environment
after it has been contaminated or trying to prevent the contamination before it occurs? Explain.
9. A green plant synthesizes glucose by photosynthesis, as shown in
the reaction
6CO2 1g2  6H2O1l2 ¡ C6H12O6 1s2  6O2 1g2
Animals use glucose as a source of energy:
C6H12O6 1s2  6O2 1g2 ¡ 6CO2 1g2  6H2O1l2
If we were to assume that both these processes occur to the same
extent in a cyclic process, what thermodynamic property must
have a nonzero value?
10. Human DNA contains almost twice as much information as is
needed to code for all the substances produced in the body. Likewise, the digital data sent from Voyager II contained one redundant bit out of every two bits of information. The Hubble
space telescope transmits three redundant bits for every bit of
information. How is entropy related to the transmission of information? What do you think is accomplished by having so
many redundant bits of information in both DNA and the space
probes?
11. Entropy has been described as “time’s arrow.” Interpret this view
of entropy.
12. A mixture of hydrogen gas and chlorine gas remains unreacted
until it is exposed to ultraviolet light from a burning magnesium
strip. Then the following reaction occurs very rapidly:
H2 1g2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2HCl1g2
Explain.
13. Table 16.1 shows the possible arrangements of four molecules in
a two-bulbed ﬂask. What are the possible arrangements if there is
one molecule in this two-bulbed ﬂask or two molecules or three
molecules? For each, what arrangement is most likely?
14. Ssurr is sometime called the energy disorder term. Explain.
15. The third law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of a perfect crystal at 0 K is zero. In Appendix 4, F(aq), OH(aq), and
S 2(aq) all have negative standard entropy values. How can S° values be less than zero?
16. The deciding factor on why HF is a weak acid and not a strong acid
like the other hydrogen halides is entropy. What occurs when HF
dissociates in water as compared to the other hydrogen halides?

783

17. List three different ways to calculate the standard free energy
change, G°, for a reaction at 25°C? How is G° estimated at
temperatures other than 25°C? What assumptions are made?
18. What information can be determined from G for a reaction? Does
one get the same information from G°, the standard free energy
change? G° allows determination of the equilibrium constant K
for a reaction. How? How can one estimate the value of K at temperatures other than 25°C for a reaction? How can one estimate
the temperature where K  1 for a reaction? Do all reactions have
a speciﬁc temperature where K  1?

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Spontaneity, Entropy, and the Second Law of
Thermodynamics: Free Energy
19. Which of the following processes are spontaneous?
a. Salt dissolves in H2O.
b. A clear solution becomes a uniform color after a few drops of
dye are added.
c. Iron rusts.
d. You clean your bedroom.
20. Which of the following processes are spontaneous?
a. A house is built.
b. A satellite is launched into orbit.
c. A satellite falls back to earth.
d. The kitchen gets cluttered.
21. Consider the following energy levels, each capable of holding two
objects:
E  2 kJ ____
E  1 kJ ____
E0

XX

Draw all the possible arrangements of the two identical particles
(represented by X) in the three energy levels. What total energy
is most likely, that is, occurs the greatest number of times? Assume that the particles are indistinguishable from each other.
22. Redo Exercise 21 with two particles A and B, which can be distinguished from each other.
23. Choose the compound with the greatest positional probability in
each case.
a. 1 mol H2 (at STP) or 1 mol H2 (at 100°C, 0.5 atm)
b. 1 mol N2 (at STP) or 1 mol N2 (at 100 K, 2.0 atm)
c. 1 mol H2O(s) (at 0°C) or 1 mol H2O(l) (at 20°C)
24. Which of the following involve an increase in the entropy of the
system?
a. melting of a solid
b. sublimation
c. freezing
d. mixing
e. separation
f. boiling
25. Predict the sign of ¢ Ssurr for the following processes.
a. H2O(l) ¡ H2O(g)
b. CO2 (g) ¡ CO2 (s)

784

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

26. Calculate ¢ Ssurr for the following reactions at 25°C and 1 atm.
a. C3H8(g)  5O2(g) 8n 3CO2(g)  4H2O(l) H°  2221 kJ
b. 2NO2(g) 8n 2NO(g)  O2(g)
H°  112 kJ
27. Given the values of ¢H and ¢ S, which of the following changes
will be spontaneous at constant T and P?
a. ¢H  25 kJ, ¢S  5.0 J/K, T  300. K
b. ¢H  25 kJ, ¢S  100. J/K, T  300. K
c. ¢H  10. kJ, ¢S  5.0 J/K, T  298 K
d. ¢H   10. kJ, ¢S  40. J/K, T  200. K
28. At what temperatures will the following processes be spontaneous?
a. ¢H  18 kJ and ¢S  60. J/K
b. ¢H  18 kJ and ¢S  60. J/K
c. ¢H  18 kJ and ¢S  60. J/K
d. ¢H  18 kJ and ¢S  60. J/K
29. Ethanethiol (C2H5SH; also called ethyl mercaptan) is commonly
added to natural gas to provide the “rotten egg” smell of a gas
leak. The boiling point of ethanethiol is 35°C and its heat of vaporization is 27.5 kJ/mol. What is the entropy of vaporization for
this substance?
30. For mercury, the enthalpy of vaporization is 58.51 kJ/mol and the
entropy of vaporization is 92.92 J/K  mol. What is the normal
boiling point of mercury?
31. For ammonia (NH3), the enthalpy of fusion is 5.65 kJ/mol and the
entropy of fusion is 28.9 J/K  mol.
a. Will NH3(s) spontaneously melt at 200. K?
b. What is the approximate melting point of ammonia?
32. The enthalpy of vaporization of ethanol is 38.7 kJ/mol at its boiling point (78°C). Determine ¢Ssys, ¢Ssurr, and ¢Suniv when 1.00
mol of ethanol is vaporized at 78°C and 1.00 atm.

Chemical Reactions: Entropy Changes and Free Energy
33. Predict the sign of S for each of the following changes.
a.

36. For each of the following pairs, which substance has the greater
value of S?
a. N2O (at 0 K) or He (at 10 K)
b. N2O(g) (at 1 atm, 25°C) or He(g) (at 1 atm, 25°C)
c. H2O(s) (at 0°C) or H2O(l) (at 0°C)
37. Predict the sign of S and then calculate S for each of the following reactions.
a. 2H2S(g)  SO2(g) 8n 3Srhombic(s)  2H2O(g)
b. 2SO3(g) 8n 2SO2(g)  O2(g)
c. Fe2O3(s)  3H2(g) 8n 2Fe(s)  3H2O(g)
38. Predict the sign of S and then calculate S for each of the following reactions.
a. H2(g)  12O2(g) 8n H2O(l)
b. 2CH3OH(g)  3O2(g) 8n 2CO2(g)  4H2O(g)
c. HCl(g) 8n H(aq)  Cl(aq)
39. For the reaction
C2H2 1g2  4F2 1g2 ¡ 2CF4 1g2  H2 1g2
S is equal to 358 J/K. Use this value and data from Appendix
4 to calculate the value of S for CF4(g).
40. For the reaction
2Al1s2  3Br2 1l2 ¡ 2AlBr3 1s2
S is equal to 144 J/K. Use this value and data from Appendix
4 to calculate the value of S for solid aluminum bromide.
41. It is quite common for a solid to change from one structure to another at a temperature below its melting point. For example, sulfur undergoes a phase change from the rhombic crystal structure
to the monoclinic crystal form at temperatures above 95C.
a. Predict the signs of H and S for the process Srhombic 8n
Smonoclinic.
b. Which form of sulfur has the more ordered crystalline
structure?
42. When most biologic enzymes are heated they lose their catalytic
activity. The change
original enzyme ¡ new form
that occurs on heating is endothermic and spontaneous. Is the
structure of the original enzyme or its new form more ordered?
Explain.
43. Consider the reaction

b. AgCl(s) 8n Ag(aq)  Cl(aq)
c. 2H2(g)  O2(g) 8n 2H2O(l)
d. H2O(l) 8n H2O(g)
34. Predict the sign of S for each of the following changes.
a. Na(s)  12Cl2(g) 8n NaCl(s)
b. N2(g)  3H2(g) 8n 2NH3(g)
c. NaCl(s) 8n Na(aq)  Cl(aq)
d. NaCl(s) 8n NaCl(l)

2O1g2 ¡ O2 1g2
a. Predict the signs of H and S.
b. Would the reaction be more spontaneous at high or low
temperatures?
44. Hydrogen cyanide is produced industrially by the following
exothermic reaction:
2NH3 1g2  3O2 1g2  2CH4 1g2 ¬¡ 2HCN1g2  6H2O1g2
1000ºC
Pt-Rh

35. For each of the following pairs of substances, which substance
has the greater value of S?
a. Cgraphite(s) or Cdiamond(s)
b. C2H5OH(l) or C2H5OH(g)
c. CO2(s) or CO2(g)

Is the high temperature needed for thermodynamic or kinetic
reasons?
45. From data in Appendix 4, calculate H, S, and G for each
of the following reactions at 25C.

Exercises
a. CH4(g)  2O2(g) 8n CO2(g)  2H2O(g)
b. 6CO2(g)  6H2O(l) 8n C6H12O6(s)  6O2(g)

calculate G for the reaction
6C1s2  3H2 1g2 ¡ C6H6 1l2

Glucose

c. P4O10(s)  6H2O(l) 8n 4H3PO4(s)
d. HCl(g)  NH3(g) 8n NH4Cl(s)
46. The decomposition of ammonium dichromate [(NH4)2Cr2O7] is
called the “volcano” demonstration for its ﬁery display. The decomposition reaction involves breaking down ammonium
dichromate into nitrogen gas, water vapor, and solid
chromium(III) oxide. From the data in Appendix 4 and given
¢H°f  23 kJ/mol and ¢S°  114 J/K  mol for (NH4)2Cr2O7,
calculate G° for the “volcano” reaction and calculate ¢G°f for
ammonium dichromate.
47. For the reaction at 298 K,

785

53. For the reaction
SF4 1g2  F2 1g2 ¡ SF6 1g2
the value of ¢G° is 374 kJ. Use this value and data from Appendix 4 to calculate the value of ¢G°f for SF4(g).
54. The value of ¢G° for the reaction
2C4H10 1g2  13O2 1g2 ¡ 8CO2 1g2  10H2O1l2

is 5490. kJ. Use this value and data from Appendix 4 to calculate the standard free energy of formation for C4H10(g).
55. Assuming standard conditions, can the following reaction take
place at room temperature?

2NO2 1g2 ∆ N2O4 1g2
the values of H  and S  are 58.03 kJ and 176.6 J/K, respectively. What is the value of G at 298 K? Assuming that
H and S do not depend on temperature, at what temperature
is G  0? Is G negative above or below this temperature?
48. At 100.°C and 1.00 atm, ¢H°  40.6 kJ/mol for the vaporization
of water. Estimate ¢G° for the vaporization of water at 90.°C and
110.°C. Assume ¢H° and ¢S° at 100.°C and 1.00 atm do not depend on temperature.
49. Using data from Appendix 4, calculate ¢H°, ¢S°, and ¢G° for
the following reactions that produce acetic acid:

3Cl2 1g2  2CH4 1g2 ¡ CH3Cl1g2  CH2Cl2 1g2  3HCl1g2

¢G° 1CH4 2  50.72 kJ/mol

¢G° 1CH3Cl2  57.37 kJ/mol

¢G° 1CH2Cl2 2  68.85 kJ/mol ¢G° 1HCl2  95.30 kJ/mol
56. Consider the reaction
2POCl3 1g2 ¡ 2PCl3 1g2  O2 1g2

a. Calculate ¢G° for this reaction. The ¢G°f values for POCl3(g)
and PCl3(g) are 502 kJ/mol and 270. kJ/mol, respectively.
b. Is this reaction spontaneous under standard conditions at 298 K?
c. The value of ¢S° for this reaction is 179 J/K. At what temperatures is this reaction spontaneous at standard conditions?
Assume that ¢H° and ¢S° do not depend on temperature.

Free Energy: Pressure Dependence and Equilibrium
57. Using data from Appendix 4, calculate G for the reaction
Which reaction would you choose as a commercial method for
producing acetic acid (CH3CO2H) at standard conditions? What
temperature conditions would you choose for the reaction? Assume ¢H° and ¢S° do not depend on temperature.
50. Consider two reactions for the production of ethanol:
C2H4 1g2  H2O1g2 ¡ CH3CH2OH1l2

C2H6 1g2  H2O1g2 ¡ CH3CH2OH1l2  H2 1g2
Which would be the more thermodynamically feasible at standard
conditions? Why?

2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1l2
C1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2

¢G°  51 kJ
¢G°  474 kJ
¢G°  394 kJ

Calculate ¢G° for CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 S CO2 1g2  2H2O1l2.
52. Given the following data:
2C6H6 1l2  15O2 1g2 ¡ 12CO2 1g2  6H2O1l2
¢G°  6399 kJ
C1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2

¢G°  394 kJ

¡ H2O1l2

¢G°  237 kJ

H2 1g2 

1
2 O2 1g2

for these conditions:
T  298 K
PNO  1.00  106 atm, PO3  2.00  106 atm
PNO2  1.00  107 atm, PO2  1.00  103 atm
58. Using data from Appendix 4, calculate G for the reaction
2H2S1g2  SO2 1g2 ∆ 3Srhombic 1s2  2H2O1g2
for the following conditions at 25C:
PH2S  1.0  104 atm

51. Given the following data:
2H2 1g2  C1s2 ¡ CH4 1g2

NO1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  O2 1g2

PSO2  1.0  102 atm
PH2O  3.0  102 atm
59. Consider the reaction
2NO2 1g2 ∆ N2O4 1g2
For each of the following mixtures of reactants and products at
25C, predict the direction in which the reaction will shift to reach
equilibrium.
a. PNO2  PN2O4  1.0 atm
b. PNO2  0.21 atm, PN2O4  0.50 atm
c. PNO2  0.29 atm, PN2O4  1.6 atm

786

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

60. Consider the following reaction:
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2
Calculate G for this reaction under the following conditions (assume an uncertainty of 1 in all quantities):
a. T  298 K, PN2  PH2  200 atm, PNH3  50 atm
b. T  298 K, PN2  200 atm, PH2  600 atm, PNH3  200 atm

67. Consider the relationship:
ln1K2 

¢H°
¢S°

RT
R

The equilibrium constant for some hypothetical process was determined as a function of temperature (in Kelvin) with the results
plotted below.

61. Consider the following reaction at 25.0C:
2NO2 1g2 ∆ N2O4 1g2

H2 1g2  Cl2 1g2 ∆ 2HCl1g2
a. Calculate H, S, G, and K (at 298 K) using data in Appendix 4.
b. If H2(g), Cl2(g), and HCl(g) are placed in a ﬂask such that the
pressure of each gas is 1 atm, in which direction will the system shift to reach equilibrium at 25C?
63. Calculate ¢G° for H2O1g2  12 O2 1g2 ∆ H2O2 1g2 at 600. K, using the following data:
H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ H2O2 1g2

2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ∆ 2H2O1g2

K  2.3  106 at 600. K
K  1.8  1037 at 600. K

64. The Ostwald process for the commercial production of nitric acid
involves three steps:
4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2
825ºC
2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2
Pt

3NO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2HNO3 1l2  NO1g2

a. Calculate H, S, G, and K (at 298 K) for each of the
three steps in the Ostwald process (see Appendix 4).
b. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the ﬁrst step at 825C,
assuming H and S do not depend on temperature.
c. Is there a thermodynamic reason for the high temperature in
the ﬁrst step assuming standard conditions?
65. Consider the following reaction at 800. K:
N2 1g2  3F2 1g2 ¡ 2NF3 1g2
An equilibrium mixture contains the following partial pressures:
PN2  0.021 atm, PF2  0.063 atm, PNF3  0.48 atm. Calculate
G for the reaction at 800. K.
66. Consider the following reaction at 298 K:
2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2SO3 1g2
An equilibrium mixture contains O2(g) and SO3(g) at partial pressures of 0.50 atm and 2.0 atm, respectively. Using data from Appendix 4, determine the equilibrium partial pressure of SO2 in the
mixture. Will this reaction be most favored at a high or a low temperature, assuming standard conditions?

30.
ln (K)

The values of H and S are 58.03 kJ/mol and 176.6
J/K  mol, respectively. Calculate the value of K at 25.0C.
Assuming H and S are temperature independent, estimate the
value of K at 100.0C.
62. Consider the reaction

40.

20.
10.

1.0

2.0

3.0

1000
T(K)

From the plot, determine the values of H and S for this
process. What would be the major difference in the ln(K) versus
1T plot for an endothermic process as compared to an exothermic
process?
68. The equilibrium constant K for the reaction
2Cl1g2 ∆ Cl2 1g2
was measured as a function of temperature (Kelvin). A graph
of ln K versus 1 T for this reaction gives a straight line with
a slope of 1.352  104 K and a y-intercept of 14.51. Determine the values of ¢H° and ¢S° for this reaction. Reference
Exercise 67.

Additional Exercises
69. Using Appendix 4 and the following data, determine S° for
Fe(CO)5(g).
Fe1s2  5CO1g2 ¡ Fe1CO2 5 1g2
Fe1CO2 5 1l2 ¡ Fe1CO2 5 1g2

Fe1s25CO1g2 ¡ Fe1CO2 5 1l2

¢S°  ?
¢S°  107 J/K
¢S°  677 J/K

70. Some water is placed in a coffee-cup calorimeter. When 1.0 g of
an ionic solid is added, the temperature of the solution increases
from 21.5°C to 24.2°C as the solid dissolves. For the dissolving
process, what are the signs for Ssys, Ssurr, and Suniv?
71. Consider the following system at equilibrium at 25°C:
PCl3 1g2  Cl2 1g2 ∆ PCl5 1g2

¢G°  92.50 kJ

What will happen to the ratio of partial pressure of PCl5 to partial pressure of PCl3 if the temperature is raised? Explain completely.
72. Calculate the entropy change for the vaporization of liquid
methane and liquid hexane using the following data.

Additional Exercises

Methane
Hexane

77. In the text the equation

Boiling Point
(1 atm)

Hvap

¢G  ¢G°  RT ln1Q2

112 K
342 K

8.20 kJ/mol
28.9 kJ/mol

was derived for gaseous reactions where the quantities in Q were
expressed in units of pressure. We also can use units of mol/L for
the quantities in Q, speciﬁcally for aqueous reactions. With this
in mind, consider the reaction

Compare the molar volume of gaseous methane at 112 K with
that of gaseous hexane at 342 K. How do the differences in molar volume affect the values of ¢ Svap for these liquids?
73. As O2(l) is cooled at 1 atm, it freezes at 54.5 K to form solid I.
At a lower temperature, solid I rearranges to solid II, which has
a different crystal structure. Thermal measurements show that ¢H
for the I S II phase transition is 743.1 J/mol, and ¢S for the
same transition is 17.0 J/K  mol. At what temperature are solids
I and II in equilibrium?
74. Consider the following reaction:
H2O1g2  Cl2O1g2 ∆ 2HOCl1g2

K298  0.090

For Cl2O(g),
¢G°f  97.9 kJ/mol
¢H°f  80.3 kJ/mol
S°  266.1 J/K  mol
a. Calculate ¢G° for the reaction using the equation ¢G° 
RT ln(K).
b. Use bond energy values (Table 8.4) to estimate ¢H° for the
reaction.
c. Use the results from parts a and b to estimate ¢S° for the reaction.
d. Estimate ¢H°f and S° for HOCl(g).
e. Estimate the value of K at 500. K.
f. Calculate ¢G at 25°C when PH2O  18 torr, PCl2O  2.0 torr,
and PHOCl  0.10 torr.
75. Carbon monoxide is toxic because it bonds much more strongly
to the iron in hemoglobin (Hgb) than does O2. Consider the
following reactions and approximate standard free energy
changes:
Hgb  O2 ¡ HgbO2

¢G°  70 kJ

Hgb  CO ¡ HgbCO

¢G°  80 kJ

Using these data, estimate the equilibrium constant value at 25°C
for the following reaction:
HgbO2  CO ∆ HgbCO  O2
76. Using the following data, calculate the value of Ksp for Ba(NO3)2,
one of the least soluble of the common nitrate salts.

Species

Gf

Ba 1aq2
NO3 1aq2
Ba1NO3 2 2 1s2

561 kJ/mol
109 kJ/mol
797 kJ/mol

2

787

HF1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  F 1aq2
for which Ka  7.2  104 at 25°C. Calculate ¢ G for the reaction under the following conditions at 25°C.
a. 3HF4  3H 4  3F 4  1.0 M
b. 3HF4  0.98 M, 3H 4  3F 4  2.7  102 M
c. 3HF4  3H 4  3F 4  1.0  105 M
d. 3HF4  3F 4  0.27 M, 3H 4  7.2  104 M
e. 3HF4  0.52 M, 3F 4  0.67 M, 3H 4  1.0  103 M
Based on the calculated ¢G values, in what direction will the
reaction shift to reach equilibrium for each of the ﬁve sets of
conditions?
78. Many biochemical reactions that occur in cells require relatively
high concentrations of potassium ion (K). The concentration
of K in muscle cells is about 0.15 M. The concentration of K
in blood plasma is about 0.0050 M. The high internal concentration in cells is maintained by pumping K from the plasma.
How much work must be done to transport 1.0 mol K from
the blood to the inside of a muscle cell at 37°C, normal body
temperature? When 1.0 mol K is transferred from blood to the
cells, do any other ions have to be transported? Why or why
not?
79. Cells use the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate, abbreviated as
ATP, as a source of energy. Symbolically, this reaction can be written as
ATP1aq2  H2O1l2 ¡ ADP1aq2  H2PO4 1aq2
where ADP represents adenosine diphosphate. For this reaction,
¢G°  30.5 kJ/mol.
a. Calculate K at 25°C.
b. If all the free energy from the metabolism of glucose
C6H12O6 1s2  6O2 1g2 ¡ 6CO2 1g2  6H2O1l2
goes into forming ATP from ADP, how many ATP molecules
can be produced for every molecule of glucose?
c. Much of the ATP formed from metabolic processes is used
to provide energy for transport of cellular components. What
amount (mol) of ATP must be hydrolyzed to provide the
energy for the transport of 1.0 mol of K from the blood
to the inside of a muscle cell at 37°C as described in Exercise 78?
80. One reaction that occurs in human metabolism is
HO2CCH2CH2CHCO2H1aq2  NH3 1aq2 ∆
ƒ
NH2
Glutamic acid
O
‘
H2NC CH2CH2CHCO2H1aq2  H2O1l2
ƒ
NH2
Glutamine

788

Chapter Sixteen Spontaneity, Entropy, and Free Energy

For this reaction ¢G°  14 kJ at 25°C.
a. Calculate K for this reaction at 25°C.
b. In a living cell this reaction is coupled with the hydrolysis of
ATP. (See Exercise 79.) Calculate ¢G° and K at 25°C for the
following reaction:
Glutamic acid1aq2  ATP1aq2  NH3 1aq2 ∆
Glutamine1aq2  ADP1aq2  H2PO4 1aq2
81. Consider the reactions
Ni2 1aq2  6NH3 1aq2 ¡ Ni1NH3 2 62 1aq2
Ni 1aq2  3en1aq2 ¡ Ni1en2 3 1aq2
2

2

where k  1.38  1023 J/K and W is the number of ways a
particular state can be obtained. (This equation is engraved on
Boltzmann’s tombstone.) Calculate S for the three arrangements
of particles in Table 16.1.
87. a. Using the free energy proﬁle for a simple one-step reaction,
show that at equilibrium K  kf kr, where kf and kr are the rate
constants for the forward and reverse reactions. Hint: Use the
relationship ¢G°  RT ln(K) and represent kf and kr using
the Arrhenius equation (k  AeEa RT ).

(1)
(2)
Ea (forward)

where
en  H2N¬CH2¬CH2¬NH2
The H values for the two reactions are quite similar, yet
Kreaction 2  Kreaction 1. Explain.
82. Use the equation in Exercise 67 to determine H and S for
the autoionization of water:

Reactants
G

Ea (reverse)
∆G°
Products

H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2
Reaction coordinate

T(C)
0
25
35
40.
50.

Kw
1.14
1.00
2.09
2.92
5.47







1015
1014
1014
1014
1014

83. Consider the reaction
Fe2O3 1s2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2Fe1s2  3H2O1g2
Assuming ¢H° and ¢S° do not depend on temperature, calculate
the temperature where K  1.00 for this reaction.

b. Why is the following statement false? “A catalyst can increase
the rate of a forward reaction but not the rate of the reverse reaction.”
88. Consider the reaction
H2 1g2  Br2 1g2 ∆ 2HBr1g2
where ¢H°  103.8 kJ/mol. In a particular experiment, equal
moles of H2(g) at 1.00 atm and Br2(g) at 1.00 atm were mixed in
a 1.00-L ﬂask at 25°C and allowed to reach equilibrium. Then the
molecules of H2 at equilibrium were counted using a very sensitive technique, and 1.10  1013 molecules were found. For this
reaction, calculate the values of K, ¢G°, and ¢S°.
89. Consider the system
A1g2 ¡ B1g2

Challenge Problems
84. Liquid water at 25°C is introduced into an evacuated, insulated vessel. Identify the signs of the following thermodynamic functions for
the process that occurs: ¢H, ¢S, ¢Twater, ¢Ssurr, ¢Suniv.
85. Using data from Appendix 4, calculate ¢H°, ¢G°, and K (at 298
K) for the production of ozone from oxygen:
3O2 1g2 ∆ 2O3 1g2
At 30 km above the surface of the earth, the temperature is about
230. K and the partial pressure of oxygen is about 1.0  103 atm.
Estimate the partial pressure of ozone in equilibrium with oxygen
at 30 km above the earth’s surface. Is it reasonable to assume that
the equilibrium between oxygen and ozone is maintained under
these conditions? Explain.
86. Entropy can be calculated by a relationship proposed by Ludwig
Boltzmann:
S  k ln 1W2

at 25°C.
a. Assuming that G°A  8996 J/mol and G°B  11,718 J/mol, calculate the value of the equilibrium constant for this reaction.
b. Calculate the equilibrium pressures that result if 1.00 mol A(g)
at 1.00 atm and 1.00 mol B(g) at 1.00 atm are mixed at 25°C.
c. Show by calculations that ¢G  0 at equilibrium.
90. The equilibrium constant for a certain reaction decreases from
8.84 to 3.25  102 when the temperature increases from 25°C
to 75°C. Estimate the temperature where K  1.00 for this reaction. Estimate the value of ¢S° for this reaction. Hint: Manipulate the equation in Exercise 67.
91. If wet silver carbonate is dried in a stream of hot air, the air must
have a certain concentration level of carbon dioxide to prevent silver carbonate from decomposing by the reaction
Ag2CO3 1s2 ∆ Ag2O 1s2  CO2 1g2
¢H° for this reaction is 79.14 kJ/mol in the temperature range of
25 to 125°C. Given that the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in

Marathon Problem
equilibrium with pure solid silver carbonate is 6.23  103 torr
at 25°C, calculate the partial pressure of CO2 necessary to prevent decomposition of Ag2CO3 at 110.°C. Hint: Manipulate the
equation in Exercise 67.
92. Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and benzene (C6H6) form ideal solutions. Consider an equimolar solution of CCl4 and C6H6 at 25°C.
The vapor above the solution is collected and condensed. Using
the following data, determine the composition in mole fraction of
the condensed vapor.

Substance
C6H6(l)
C6H6(g)
CCl4(l)
CCl4(g)

Gf
124.50
129.66
65.21
60.59

kJ/mol
kJ/mol
kJ/mol
kJ/mol

93. Some nonelectrolyte solute (molar mass  142 g/mol) was dissolved in 150. mL of a solvent (density  0.879 g/cm3 ) . The elevated boiling point of the solution was 355.4 K. What mass of
solute was dissolved in the solvent? For the solvent, the enthalpy
of vaporization is 33.90 kJ/mol, the entropy of vaporization
is 95.95 J/K  mol, and the boiling-point elevation constant is
2.5 K  kg/mol.
94. You have a l.00-L sample of hot water (90.0°C) sitting open in a
25.0°C room. Eventually the water cools to 250°C while the temperature of the room remains unchanged. Calculate ¢Ssurr for this
process. Assume the density of water is 1.00 g / cm3 over this temperature range, and the heat capacity of water is constant over this
temperature range and equal to 75.4 J/K  mol.
95. Consider a weak acid, HX. If a 0.10 M solution of HX has a pH
of 5.83 at 25°C, what is ¢G° for the acid’s dissociation reaction
at 25°C?
96. Sodium chloride is added to water (at 25°C) until it is saturated.
Calculate the Cl concentration in such a solution.

Species

G(kJ/mol)

NaCl(s)
Na+(aq)
Cl 1aq2

384
262
131

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

97. For the equilibrium
A1g2  2B1g2 ∆ C1g2
the initial concentrations are [A]  [B]  [C]  0.100 atm.
Once equilibrium has been established, it is found that [C] 
0.040 atm. What is ¢G° for this reaction at 25°C?

789

98. What is the pH of a 0.125 M solution of the weak base B if
¢H°  28.0 kJ and ¢S°  175 J/K for the following equilibrium reaction at 25°C?
B1aq2  H2O1l2 ÷ BH 1aq2  OH 1aq2

Marathon Problem
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

99. Impure nickel, reﬁned by smelting sulﬁde ores in a blast furnace,
can be converted into metal from 99.90% to 99.99% purity by
the Mond process. The primary reaction involved in the Mond
process is
Ni 1s2  4CO1g2 ∆ Ni1CO2 4 1g2
a. Without referring to Appendix 4, predict the sign of ¢S° for
the above reaction. Explain.
b. The spontaneity of the above reaction is temperature dependent. Predict the sign of ¢ Ssurr for this reaction. Explain.
c. For Ni(CO)4(g), ¢H°f  607 kJ/mol and S°  417 J K 
mol at 298 K. Using these values and data in Appendix 4, calculate ¢H° and ¢S° for the above reaction.
d. Calculate the temperature at which ¢G°  0 (K  1) for the
above reaction, assuming that H° and ¢S° do not depend on
temperature.
e. The ﬁrst step of the Mond process involves equilibrating impure nickel with CO(g) and Ni(CO)4(g) at about 50°C. The
purpose of this step is to convert as much nickel as possible
into the gas phase. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the
above reaction at 50.°C.
f. In the second step of the Mond process, the gaseous Ni(CO)4
is isolated and heated to 227°C. The purpose of this step is to
deposit as much nickel as possible as pure solid (the reverse
of the above reaction). Calculate the equilibrium constant for
the above reaction at 227°C.
g. Why is temperature increased for the second step of the Mond
process?
h. The Mond process relies on the volatility of Ni(CO)4 for its
success. Only pressures and temperatures at which Ni(CO)4 is
a gas are useful. A recently developed variation of the Mond
process carries out the ﬁrst step at higher pressures and a temperature of 152°C. Estimate the maximum pressure of
Ni(CO)4(g) that can be attained before the gas will liquefy at
152°C. The boiling point for Ni(CO)4 is 42°C and the enthalpy
of vaporization is 29.0 kJ/mol.
[Hint: The phase change reaction and the corresponding equilibrium expression are
Ni1CO2 4 1l2 ∆ Ni1CO2 4 1g2

K  PNi1CO24

Ni(CO)4(g) will liquefy when the pressure of Ni(CO)4 is greater
than the K value.]
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

17 Electrochemistry
Contents
17.1 Galvanic Cells
• Cell Potential
17.2 Standard Reduction
Potentials
• Line Notation
• Complete Description of a
Galvanic Cell
17.3 Cell Potential, Electrical
Work, and Free Energy
17.4 Dependence of Cell
Potential on Concentration
• Concentration Cells
• The Nernst Equation
• Ion-Selective Electrodes
• Calculation of Equilibrium
Constants for Redox Reactions
17.5 Batteries
• Lead Storage Battery
• Other Batteries
• Fuel Cells
17.6 Corrosion
• Corrosion of Iron
• Prevention of Corrosion
17.7 Electrolysis
• Electrolysis of Water
• Electrolysis of Mixtures
of Ions
17.8 Commercial Electrolytic
Processes
• Production of Aluminum
• Electroreﬁning of Metals
• Metal Plating
• Electrolysis of Sodium
Chrloride

A nickel half-electroplated with copper.

790

E

lectrochemistry constitutes one of the most important interfaces between chemistry
and everyday life. Every time you start your car, turn on your calculator, look at your
digital watch, or listen to a radio at the beach, you are depending on electrochemical
reactions. Our society sometimes seems to run almost entirely on batteries. Certainly the
advent of small, dependable batteries along with silicon-chip technology has made possible the tiny calculators, tape recorders, and clocks that we take for granted.
Electrochemistry is important in other less obvious ways. For example, the corrosion of iron, which has tremendous economic implications, is an electrochemical
process. In addition, many important industrial materials such as aluminum, chlorine,
and sodium hydroxide are prepared by electrolytic processes. In analytical chemistry,
electrochemical techniques employ electrodes that are speciﬁc for a given molecule or
ion, such as H (pH meters), F, Cl, and many others. These increasingly important
methods are used to analyze for trace pollutants in natural waters or for the tiny
quantities of chemicals in human blood that may signal the development of a speciﬁc
disease.
Electrochemistry is best deﬁned as the study of the interchange of chemical and
electrical energy. It is primarily concerned with two processes that involve oxidation–
reduction reactions: the generation of an electric current from a spontaneous chemical
reaction and the opposite process, the use of a current to produce chemical change.

17.1

Galvanic Cells

As we discussed in detail in Section 4.9, an oxidation–reduction (redox) reaction involves a transfer of electrons from the reducing agent to the oxidizing agent. Recall that
oxidation involves a loss of electrons (an increase in oxidation number) and that reduction involves a gain of electrons (a decrease in oxidation number).
To understand how a redox reaction can be used to generate a current, let’s consider
the reaction between MnO4 and Fe2:
8H 1aq2  MnO4 1aq2  5Fe2 1aq2 ¡ Mn2 1aq2  5Fe3 1aq2  4H2O1l2

Balancing half-reactions is discussed in
Section 4.10.

In this reaction, Fe2 is oxidized and MnO4 is reduced; electrons are transferred from
Fe2 (the reducing agent) to MnO4 (the oxidizing agent).
It is useful to break a redox reaction into half-reactions, one involving oxidation and
one involving reduction. For the reaction above, the half-reactions are
8H  MnO4  5e ¡ Mn2  4H2O
Oxidation: 51Fe2 ¡ Fe3  e 2

Reduction:

The multiplication of the second half-reaction by 5 indicates that this reaction must occur
ﬁve times for each time the ﬁrst reaction occurs. The balanced overall reaction is the sum
of the half-reactions.
When MnO4 and Fe2 are present in the same solution, the electrons are transferred
directly when the reactants collide. Under these conditions, no useful work is obtained
from the chemical energy involved in the reaction, which instead is released as heat. How
can we harness this energy? The key is to separate the oxidizing agent from the reducing
agent, thus requiring the electron transfer to occur through a wire. The current produced
in the wire by the electron ﬂow can then be directed through a device, such as an electric
motor, to provide useful work.

791

792

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

Wire

FIGURE 17.1
Schematic of a method to separate the
oxidizing and reducing agents of a redox
reaction. (The solutions also contain
counterions to balance the charge.)

A galvanic cell uses a spontaneous redox
reaction to produce a current that can be
used to do work.

Oxidation occurs at the anode. Reduction
occurs at the cathode.

MnO4– (aq)

Fe2+(aq)

H+(aq)

For example, consider the system illustrated in Fig. 17.1. If our reasoning has been
correct, electrons should ﬂow through the wire from Fe2 to MnO4. However, when we
construct the apparatus as shown, no ﬂow of electrons is apparent. Why? Careful observation shows that when we connect the wires from the two compartments, current ﬂows
for an instant and then ceases. The current stops ﬂowing because of charge buildups in
the two compartments. If electrons ﬂowed from the right to the left compartment in the
apparatus as shown, the left compartment (receiving electrons) would become negatively
charged, and the right compartment (losing electrons) would become positively charged.
Creating a charge separation of this type requires a large amount of energy. Thus sustained electron ﬂow cannot occur under these conditions.
However, we can solve this problem very simply. The solutions must be connected
so that ions can ﬂow to keep the net charge in each compartment zero. This connection might involve a salt bridge (a U-tube ﬁlled with an electrolyte) or a porous disk
in a tube connecting the two solutions (see Fig. 17.2). Either of these devices allows
ions to ﬂow without extensive mixing of the solutions. When we make the provision
for ion ﬂow, the circuit is complete. Electrons ﬂow through the wire from reducing
agent to oxidizing agent, and ions ﬂow from one compartment to the other to keep the
net charge zero.
We now have covered all the essential characteristics of a galvanic cell, a device in
which chemical energy is changed to electrical energy. (The opposite process is called
electrolysis and will be considered in Section 17.7.)
The reaction in an electrochemical cell occurs at the interface between the electrode
and the solution where the electron transfer occurs. The electrode compartment in which
oxidation occurs is called the anode; the electrode compartment in which reduction occurs is called the cathode (see Fig. 17.3).

Salt bridge

Porous disk

FIGURE 17.2
Galvanic cells can contain a salt bridge as
in (a) or a porous-disk connection as in
(b). A salt bridge contains a strong electrolyte held in a Jello-like matrix. A porous
disk contains tiny passages that allow
hindered ﬂow of ions.

(a)

(b)

17.1 Galvanic Cells
e–

e–

e–

FIGURE 17.3
An electrochemical process involves electron transfer at the interface between the
electrode and the solution. (a) The species
in the solution acting as the reducing agent
supplies electrons to the anode. (b) The
species in the solution acting as the
oxidizing agent receives electrons from the
cathode.

793

e–

Porous
disk

e–

Reducing
agent

Oxidizing
agent

(a) Anode

e–

(b) Cathode

Cell Potential
Visualization: Voltaic Cell:
Cathode Reaction

Visualization: Voltaic Cell:
Anode Reaction
A volt is 1 joule of work per coulomb of
charge transferred: 1 V  1 J/C.

A galvanic cell consists of an oxidizing agent in one compartment that pulls electrons through
a wire from a reducing agent in the other compartment. The “pull,” or driving force, on the
electrons is called the cell potential 1ecell 2, or the electromotive force (emf) of the cell. The
unit of electrical potential is the volt (abbreviated V), which is deﬁned as 1 joule of work
per coulomb of charge transferred.
How can we measure the cell potential? One possible instrument is a crude voltmeter,
which works by drawing current through a known resistance. However, when current ﬂows
through a wire, the frictional heating that occurs wastes some of the potentially useful energy of the cell. A traditional voltmeter will therefore measure a potential that is less than
the maximum cell potential. The key to determining the maximum potential is to do the
measurement under conditions of zero current so that no energy is wasted. Traditionally,
this has been accomplished by inserting a variable-voltage device (powered from an external source) in opposition to the cell potential. The voltage on this instrument (called a
potentiometer) is adjusted until no current ﬂows in the cell circuit. Under such conditions, the cell potential is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to the voltage setting
of the potentiometer. This value represents the maximum cell potential, since no energy
is wasted heating the wire. More recently, advances in electronic technology have allowed
the design of digital voltmeters that draw only a negligible amount of current (see Fig. 17.4).
Since these instruments are more convenient to use, they have replaced potentiometers in
the modern laboratory.

Digital
voltmeter

FIGURE 17.4
Digital voltmeters draw only a negligible
current and are convenient to use.

794

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

17.2
The name galvanic cell honors Luigi
Galvani (1737–1798), an Italian scientist
generally credited with the discovery of
electricity. These cells are sometimes
called voltaic cells after Alessandro Volta
(1745–1827), another Italian, who ﬁrst
constructed cells of this type around
1800.

Standard Reduction Potentials

The reaction in a galvanic cell is always an oxidation–reduction reaction that can be
broken down into two half-reactions. It would be convenient to assign a potential to
each half-reaction so that when we construct a cell from a given pair of half-reactions
we can obtain the cell potential by summing the half-cell potentials. For example,
the observed potential for the cell shown in Fig. 17.5(a) is 0.76 V, and the cell reaction* is
2H 1aq2  Zn1s2 ¡ Zn2 1aq2  H2 1g2
For this cell, the anode compartment contains a zinc metal electrode with Zn2 and SO42
ions in aqueous solution. The anode reaction is the oxidation half-reaction:
Zn ¡ Zn2  2e
The zinc metal, in producing Zn2 ions that go into solution, is giving up electrons, which
ﬂow through the wire. For now, we will assume that all cell components are in their standard states, so in this case the solution in the anode compartment will contain 1 M Zn2.
The cathode reaction of this cell is the reduction half-reaction:
2H  2e ¡ H2
The cathode consists of a platinum electrode (used because it is a chemically inert
conductor) in contact with 1 M H ions and bathed by hydrogen gas at 1 atm. Such an
electrode, called the standard hydrogen electrode, is shown in Fig. 17.5(b).
Although we can measure the total potential of this cell (0.76 V), there is no way to
measure the potentials of the individual electrode processes. Thus, if we want potentials
for the half-reactions (half-cells), we must arbitrarily divide the total cell potential. For
example, if we assign the reaction

An electrochemical cell with a measured
potential of 1.10 V.

2H  2e ¡ H2

Digital
voltmeter

e–

e–

e–

e–

Zn
metal

FIGURE 17.5
(a) A galvanic cell involving the reactions
Zn S Zn2  2e  (at the anode) and
2H  2e S H2 (at the cathode) has a
potential of 0.76 V. (b) The standard
hydrogen electrode where H2( g) at 1 atm is
passed over a platinum electrode in contact
with 1 M H ions. This electrode process
(assuming ideal behavior) is arbitrarily
assigned a value of exactly zero volts.

H2(g) in
H2(g)

Zn2 +
SO42 –
1.0 M ZnSO4
solution
Anode
(a)

H+
Cl–
1.0 M H+ ions
(for example,
1 M HCl)

Pt (electrode)
1 M H + ions
° = 0.000 volt

Cathode
(b)

*In this text we will follow the convention of indicating the physical states of the reactants and products
only in the overall redox reaction. For simplicity, half-reactions will not include the physical states.

17.2 Standard Reduction Potentials
3H 4  1 M and

where

795

PH2  1 atm

a potential of exactly zero volts, then the reaction
Zn ¡ Zn2  2e
will have a potential of 0.76 V because
e°cell  e°H S H2  e°Zn S Zn2

Visualization: Electrochemical
Half-Reactions in a Galvanic
Cell
Standard states were discussed in
Section 6.4.

Visualization: Zinc/Copper
Cells with Lemons

h
0.76 V

h
0V

h
0.76 V

where the superscript  indicates that standard states are employed. In fact, by setting the
standard potential for the half-reaction 2H  2e S H2 equal to zero, we can assign
values to all other half-reactions.
For example, the measured potential for the cell shown in Fig. 17.6 is 1.10 V. The
cell reaction is
Zn1s2  Cu2 1aq2 ¡ Zn2 1aq2  Cu1s2
which can be divided into the half-reactions
Anode:
Cathode:
Then

Zn ¡ Zn2  2e
Cu2  2e ¡ Cu

e°cell  e°Zn S Zn2  e°Cu2 S Cu
Digital
voltmeter

e–

e–
e–

e–
Anode

Cathode

Zn(s)

Zn2 +
SO42 –

Cu2 +
SO42 –

1.0 M Zn2 +
solution

1.0 M Cu2 +
solution

2e–

Cu(s)

2e–

Zn

Zn 2 +
Cu
Cu 2 +

FIGURE 17.6
A galvanic cell involving the half-reactions
Zn S Zn2  2e (anode) and Cu2 
2e  S Cu (cathode), with e°cell  1.10 V.

Zn 2 +

Cu 2 +

796

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
Since e°Zn S Zn2 was earlier assigned a value of 0.76 V, the value of e°Cu2 S Cu must be
0.34 V because
1.10 V  0.76 V  0.34 V

The standard hydrogen potential is the
reference potential against which all
half-reaction potentials are assigned.

Visualization: Galvanic
(Voltaic) Cells

All half-reactions are given as reduction
processes in standard tables.

The scientiﬁc community has universally accepted the half-reaction potentials based on
the assignment of zero volts to the process 2H  2e S H2 (under standard conditions
where ideal behavior is assumed). However, before we can use these values to calculate cell
potentials, we need to understand several essential characteristics of half-cell potentials.
The accepted convention is to give the potentials of half-reactions as reduction
processes. For example:
2H  2e ¡ H2
Cu2  2e ¡ Cu
Zn2  2e ¡ Zn
The e° values corresponding to reduction half-reactions with all solutes at 1 M and all
gases at 1 atm are called standard reduction potentials. Standard reduction potentials
for the most common half-reactions are given in Table 17.1 and Appendix 5.5.
Combining two half-reactions to obtain a balanced oxidation–reduction reaction often
requires two manipulations:
1. One of the reduction half-reactions must be reversed (since redox reactions must
involve a substance being oxidized and a substance being reduced). The half-reaction
with the largest positive potential will run as written (as a reduction), and the other

TABLE 17.1

Standard Reduction Potentials at 25ºC (298 K) for Many Common Half-Reactions
Half-Reaction

e (V)

Half-Reaction

e (V)

F2  2e S 2F
Ag2  e S Ag
Co3  e S Co2
H2O2  2H  2e S 2H2O
Ce4  e S Ce3
PbO2  4H  SO42  2e S PbSO4  2H2O
MnO4  4H  3e S MnO2  2H2O
2e  2H  IO4 S IO3  H2O
MnO4  8H  5e S Mn2  4H2O
Au3  3e S Au
PbO2  4H  2e S Pb2  2H2O
Cl2  2e S 2Cl
Cr2O72  14H  6e S 2Cr 3  7H2O
O2  4H  4e S 2H2O
MnO2  4H  2e S Mn2  2H2O
IO3  6H  5e S 12I2  3H2O
Br2  2e S 2Br
VO2  2H  e S VO2  H2O
AuCl4  3e S Au  4Cl
NO3  4H  3e S NO  2H2O
ClO2  e S ClO2
2Hg2  2e S Hg22
Ag  e S Ag
Hg22  2e S 2Hg
Fe3  e S Fe2
O2  2H  2e S H2O2
MnO4  e S MnO42
I2  2e S 2I
Cu  e S Cu

2.87
1.99
1.82
1.78
1.70
1.69
1.68
1.60
1.51
1.50
1.46
1.36
1.33
1.23
1.21
1.20
1.09
1.00
0.99
0.96
0.954
0.91
0.80
0.80
0.77
0.68
0.56
0.54
0.52

O2  2H2O  4e S 4OH
Cu2  2e S Cu
Hg2Cl2  2e S 2Hg  2Cl
AgCl  e S Ag  Cl
SO42  4H  2e S H2SO3  H2O
Cu2  e S Cu
2H  2e S H2
Fe3  3e S Fe
Pb2  2e S Pb
Sn2  2e S Sn
Ni2  2e S Ni
PbSO4  2e S Pb  SO42
Cd2  2e S Cd
Fe2  2e S Fe
Cr3  e S Cr2
Cr3  3e S Cr
Zn2  2e S Zn
2H2O  2e S H2  2OH
Mn2  2e S Mn
Al3  3e S Al
H2  2e S 2H
Mg2  2e S Mg
La3  3e S La
Na  e S Na
Ca2  2e S Ca
Ba2  2e S Ba
K  e S K
Li  e S Li

0.40
0.34
0.27
0.22
0.20
0.16
0.00
0.036
0.13
0.14
0.23
0.35
0.40
0.44
0.50
0.73
0.76
0.83
1.18
1.66
2.23
2.37
2.37
2.71
2.76
2.90
2.92
3.05

17.2 Standard Reduction Potentials
When a half-reaction is reversed, the sign
of e° is reversed.

797

half-reaction will be forced to run in reverse (will be the oxidation reaction). The net
potential of the cell will be the difference between the two. Since the reduction process
occurs at the cathode and the oxidation process occurs at the anode, we can write
e°cell  e° 1cathode2  e° 1anode2
Because subtraction means “change the sign and add,” in the examples done here we
will change the sign of the oxidation (anode) reaction when we reverse it and add it
to the reduction (cathode) reaction.

When a half-reaction is multiplied by an
integer, e° remains the same.

2. Since the number of electrons lost must equal the number gained, the half-reactions
must be multiplied by integers as necessary to achieve the balanced equation. However, the value of e° is not changed when a half-reaction is multiplied by an integer.
Since a standard reduction potential is an intensive property (it does not depend on
how many times the reaction occurs), the potential is not multiplied by the integer
required to balance the cell reaction.
Consider a galvanic cell based on the redox reaction
Fe3 1aq2  Cu1s2 ¡ Cu2 1aq2  Fe2 1aq2
The pertinent half-reactions are
Fe3  e ¡ Fe2
Cu2  2e ¡ Cu

Visualization: Copper Metal in
Water
Visualization: Copper Metal in
Sulfuric Acid
Visualization: Copper Metal in
Hydrochloric Acid
Visualization: Copper Metal in
Nitric Acid

e°  0.77 V
e°  0.34 V

(1)
(2)

To balance the cell reaction and calculate the standard cell potential, reaction (2) must be
reversed:
Cu ¡ Cu2  2e

e°  0.34 V

Note the change in sign for the e° value. Now, since each Cu atom produces two electrons but each Fe3 ion accepts only one electron, reaction (1) must be multiplied by 2:
2Fe3  2e ¡ 2Fe2

e°  0.77 V

Note that e° is not changed in this case.
Now we can obtain the balanced cell reaction by summing the appropriately modiﬁed half-reactions:
2Fe3  2e ¡ 2Fe2
Cu ¡ Cu2  2e

Cell reaction: Cu1s2  2Fe3 1aq2 ¡ Cu2 1aq2  2Fe2 1aq2

Sample Exercise 17.1

e 1cathode2  0.77 V
e 1anode2  0.34 V

e°cell  e° 1cathode2  e° 1anode2
 0.77 V  0.34 V  0.43 V

Galvanic Cells
a. Consider a galvanic cell based on the reaction
Al3 1aq2  Mg1s2 ¡ Al1s2  Mg2 1aq2
The half-reactions are
Al3  3e ¡ Al
Mg2  2e ¡ Mg

e°  1.66 V
e°  2.37 V

Give the balanced cell reaction and calculate e° for the cell.
b. A galvanic cell is based on the reaction
MnO4 1aq2  H 1aq2  ClO3 1aq2 ¡ ClO4 1aq2  Mn2 1aq2  H2O1l2

(1)
(2)

798

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
The half-reactions are
MnO4  5e  8H ¡ Mn2  4H2O
ClO4  2H  2e ¡ ClO3  H2O

e°  1.51 V
e°  1.19 V

(1)
(2)

Give the balanced cell reaction and calculate e° for the cell.
Solution
a. The half-reaction involving magnesium must be reversed and since this is the oxidation process, it is the anode:
Mg ¡ Mg2  2e

e° 1anode2  12.37 V2  2.37 V

Also, since the two half-reactions involve different numbers of electrons, they must be
multiplied by integers as follows:
21Al3  3e ¡ Al2
31Mg ¡ Mg2  2e 2

2Al3 1aq2  3Mg1s2 ¡ 2Al1s2  3Mg2 1aq2


e° 1cathode2  1.66 V
e° 1anode2  2.37 V

e°cell  e° 1cathode2  e° 1anode2
 1.66 V  2.37 V  0.71 V

b. Half-reaction (2) must be reversed (it is the anode), and both half-reactions must be
multiplied by integers to make the number of electrons equal:
21MnO4  5e  8H ¡ Mn2  4H2O2
51ClO3  H2O ¡ ClO4  2H  2e 2

2MnO4 1aq2  6H 1aq2  5ClO3 1aq2 ¡
2Mn2 1aq2  3H2O1l2  5ClO4 1aq2

e° 1cathode2  1.51 V
e° 1anode2  1.19 V

e°cell  e° 1cathode2  e° 1anode2
 1.51 V  1.19 V  0.32 V
See Exercises 17.27 and 17.28.

Line Notation
We now will introduce a handy line notation used to describe electrochemical cells. In this
notation the anode components are listed on the left and the cathode components are
listed on the right, separated by double vertical lines (indicating the salt bridge or porous
disk). For example, the line notation for the cell described in Sample Exercise 17.1(a) is
Mg1s2 0Mg2 1aq2 0 0Al3 1aq2 0 Al1s2
In this notation a phase difference (boundary) is indicated by a single vertical line. Thus,
in this case, vertical lines occur between the solid Mg metal and the Mg2 in aqueous solution and between solid Al and Al3 in aqueous solution. Also note that the substance
constituting the anode is listed at the far left and the substance constituting the cathode is
listed at the far right.
For the cell described in Sample Exercise 17.1(b), all the components involved in the
oxidation–reduction reaction are ions. Since none of these dissolved ions can serve as an
electrode, a nonreacting (inert) conductor must be used. The usual choice is platinum.
Thus, for the cell described in Sample Exercise 17.1(b), the line notation is
Pt1s2 0 ClO3 1aq2, ClO4 1aq2, H 1aq2 0 0 H 1aq2, MnO4 1aq2, Mn2 1aq2 0 Pt1s2

Complete Description of a Galvanic Cell
Next we want to consider how to describe a galvanic cell fully, given just its halfreactions. This description will include the cell reaction, the cell potential, and the

17.2 Standard Reduction Potentials

799

physical setup of the cell. Let’s consider a galvanic cell based on the following halfreactions:
Fe2  2e ¡ Fe
MnO4  5e  8H ¡ Mn2  4H2O
A galvanic cell runs spontaneously in the
direction that gives a positive value for
ecell.

In a working galvanic cell, one of these reactions must run in reverse. Which one?
We can answer this question by considering the sign of the potential of a working
cell: A cell will always run spontaneously in the direction that produces a positive cell
potential. Thus, in the present case, it is clear that the half-reaction involving iron must
be reversed, since this choice leads to a positive cell potential:


MnO4
e–

e–

e–

where
e–

Porous
disk

Fe

e°  0.44 V
e°  1.51 V

Fe ¡ Fe2  2e
 5e  8H ¡ Mn2  4H2O

e°  0.44 V
e°  1.51 V

Anode reaction
Cathode reaction

e°cell  e° 1cathode2  e° 1anode2  1.51 V  0.44 V  1.95 V

The balanced cell reaction is obtained as follows:
Pt

21MnO4

51Fe ¡ Fe2  2e 2
 5e  8H ¡ Mn2  4H2O2

2MnO4 1aq2  5Fe1s2  16H 1aq2 ¡ 5Fe2 1aq2  2Mn2 1aq2  8H2O1l2
1 M Fe2+

1 M MnO4–
1 M H+
1 M Mn2+

Anode

Cathode

FIGURE 17.7
The schematic of a galvanic cell based on
the half-reactions:
MnO4

Fe ¡ Fe2  2e

 5e  8H ¡ Mn2  4H2O

Now consider the physical setup of the cell, shown schematically in Fig. 17.7. In the
left compartment the active components in their standard states are pure metallic iron (Fe)
and 1.0 M Fe2. The anion present depends on the iron salt used. In this compartment the
anion does not participate in the reaction but simply balances the charge. The half-reaction
that takes place at this electrode is
Fe ¡ Fe2  2e
which is an oxidation reaction, so this compartment is the anode. The electrode consists
of pure iron metal.
In the right compartment the active components in their standard states are 1.0 M
MnO4, 1.0 M H, and 1.0 M Mn2, with appropriate unreacting ions (often called counterions) to balance the charge. The half-reaction in this compartment is
MnO4  5e  8H ¡ Mn2  4H2O
which is a reduction reaction, so this compartment is the cathode. Since neither MnO4
nor Mn2 ions can serve as the electrode, a nonreacting conductor such as platinum must
be employed.
The next step is to determine the direction of electron ﬂow. In the left compartment
the half-reaction involves the oxidation of iron:
Fe ¡ Fe2  2e
In the right compartment the half-reaction is the reduction of MnO4:
MnO4  5e  8H ¡ Mn2  4H2O
Thus the electrons ﬂow from Fe to MnO4 in this cell, or from the anode to the cathode,
as is always the case. The line notation for this cell is
Fe1s2 0 Fe2 1aq2 0 0 MnO4 1aq2, Mn2 1aq2 0 Pt1s2
A complete description of a galvanic cell usually includes four items:
• The cell potential (always positive for a galvanic cell where e°cell  e° 1cathode2 
e° 1anode2 and the balanced cell reaction.
• The direction of electron ﬂow, obtained by inspecting the half-reactions and using the
direction that gives a positive ecell.

800

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
• Designation of the anode and cathode.
• The nature of each electrode and the ions present in each compartment. A chemically
inert conductor is required if none of the substances participating in the half-reaction is
a conducting solid.
Sample Exercise 17.2

Description of a Galvanic Cell
Describe completely the galvanic cell based on the following half-reactions under standard
conditions:
Ag  e ¡ Ag
Fe3  e ¡ Fe2

° = 0.03 V
e–

Item 1 Since a positive e°cell value is required, reaction (2) must run in reverse:

e–
Porous
disk

Ag  e ¡ Ag
Fe2 ¡ Fe3  e

Ag

Cell reaction:
1 M Fe2+
1 M Fe3+
Anode

(1)
(2)

Solution

e–

e–
Pt

e°  0.80 V
e°  0.77 V

1 M Ag+

Cathode

FIGURE 17.8
Schematic diagram for the galvanic cell
based on the half-reactions
Ag   e ¡ Ag
Fe 2 ¡ Fe 3  e 

Ag 1aq2  Fe2 1aq2 ¡ Fe3 1aq2  Ag1s2

e° 1cathode2  0.80 V
e° 1anode2  0.77 V
e°cell 

0.03 V

Item 2 Since Ag receives electrons and Fe2 loses electrons in the cell reaction, the
electrons will ﬂow from the compartment containing Fe2 to the compartment containing
Ag.
Item 3 Oxidation occurs in the compartment containing Fe2 (electrons ﬂow from Fe2
to Ag). Hence this compartment functions as the anode. Reduction occurs in the compartment containing Ag, so this compartment functions as the cathode.
Item 4 The electrode in the AgAg compartment is silver metal, and an inert conductor,
such as platinum, must be used in the Fe2Fe3 compartment. Appropriate counterions
are assumed to be present. The diagram for this cell is shown in Fig. 17.8. The line notation
for this cell is
Pt1s2 0 Fe2 1aq2, Fe3 1aq2 0 0 Ag 1aq2 0 Ag1s2
See Exercises 17.29 and 17.30.

17.3

Cell Potential, Electrical Work, and Free Energy

So far we have considered electrochemical cells in a very practical fashion without much
theoretical background. The next step will be to explore the relationship between thermodynamics and electrochemistry.
The work that can be accomplished when electrons are transferred through a wire
depends on the “push” (the thermodynamic driving force) behind the electrons. This
driving force (the emf) is deﬁned in terms of a potential difference (in volts) between two
points in the circuit. Recall that a volt represents a joule of work per coulomb of charge
transferred:
emf  potential difference 1V2 

Using a battery-powered drill to insert a
screw.

work 1J2
charge 1C2

Thus 1 joule of work is produced or required (depending on the direction) when 1 coulomb
of charge is transferred between two points in the circuit that differ by a potential of 1 volt.
In this book, work is viewed from the point of view of the system. Thus work ﬂowing
out of the system is indicated by a minus sign. When a cell produces a current, the cell

17.3 Cell Potential, Electrical Work, and Free Energy

801

potential is positive, and the current can be used to do work—to run a motor, for instance.
Thus the cell potential e and the work w have opposite signs:
e

w
q

d Work
d Charge

w  qe

Therefore,

From this equation it can be seen that the maximum work in a cell would be obtained
at the maximum cell potential:
wmax  qemax
Work is never the maximum possible if
any current is ﬂowing.

or

wmax  qemax

However, there is a problem. To obtain electrical work, current must ﬂow. When current ﬂows, some energy is inevitably wasted through frictional heating, and the maximum
work is not obtained. This reﬂects the important general principle introduced in Section
16.9: In any real, spontaneous process some energy is always wasted—the actual work
realized is always less than the calculated maximum. This is a consequence of the fact
that the entropy of the universe must increase in any spontaneous process. Recall from
Section 16.9 that the only process from which maximum work could be realized is the
hypothetical reversible process. For a galvanic cell this would involve an inﬁnitesimally
small current ﬂow and thus an inﬁnite amount of time to do the work. Even though we
can never achieve the maximum work through the actual discharge of a galvanic cell, we
can measure the maximum potential. There is negligible current ﬂow when a cell potential is measured with a potentiometer or an efﬁcient digital voltmeter. No current ﬂow implies no waste of energy, so the potential measured is the maximum.
Although we can never actually realize the maximum work from a cell reaction, the
value for it is still useful in evaluating the efﬁciency of a real process based on the cell
reaction. For example, suppose a certain galvanic cell has a maximum potential (at zero
current) of 2.50 V. In a particular experiment 1.33 moles of electrons were passed through
this cell at an average actual potential of 2.10 V. The actual work done is
w  qe
where e represents the actual potential difference at which the current ﬂowed (2.10 V or
2.10 J/C) and q is the quantity of charge in coulombs transferred. The charge on 1 mole
of electrons is a constant called the faraday (abbreviated F), which has the value 96,485
coulombs of charge per mole of electrons. Thus q equals the number of moles of electrons times the charge per mole of electrons:
q  nF  1.33 mol e  96,485 C/mol e
Then, for the preceding experiment, the actual work is
w  qe  11.33 mol e  96,485 C/mol e 2  12.10 J/C2
 2.69  105 J
For the maximum possible work, the calculation is similar, except that the maximum
potential is used:

Michael Faraday lecturing at the Royal
Institution before Prince Albert and others
(1855). The faraday was named in honor of
Michael Faraday (1791–1867), an Englishman who may have been the greatest
experimental scientist of the nineteenth
century. Among his many achievements
were the invention of the electric motor
and generator and the development of the
principles of electrolysis.

wmax  qe
 a1.33 mol e  96,485

C
J
b
 ba2.50
mol e
C

 3.21  105 J
Thus, in its actual operation, the efﬁciency of this cell is
2.69  105 J
w
 100% 
 100%  83.8%
wmax
3.21  105 J

802

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
Next we want to relate the potential of a galvanic cell to free energy. In Section 16.9
we saw that for a process carried out at constant temperature and pressure, the change in
free energy equals the maximum useful work obtainable from that process:
wmax  ¢G
For a galvanic cell,
wmax  qemax  ¢G
q  nF

Since

¢G  qemax  nF emax

we have

From now on the subscript on emax will be deleted, with the understanding that any potential given in this book is the maximum potential. Thus
¢G  nFe
For standard conditions,
¢G°  nFe°
This equation states that the maximum cell potential is directly related to the free energy
difference between the reactants and the products in the cell. This relationship is important because it provides an experimental means to obtain G for a reaction. It also conﬁrms
that a galvanic cell will run in the direction that gives a positive value for ecell; a positive
ecell value corresponds to a negative G value, which is the condition for spontaneity.
Sample Exercise 17.3

Calculating G for a Cell Reaction
Using the data in Table 17.1, calculate G for the reaction
Cu2 1aq2  Fe1s2 ¡ Cu1s2  Fe2 1aq2
Is this reaction spontaneous?
Solution
The half-reactions are
Cu2  2e ¡ Cu
Fe ¡ Fe2  2e

e° 1cathode2  0.34 V

e° 1anode2  0.44 V

Cu2  Fe ¡ Fe2  Cu

e°cell  0.78 V

We can calculate G from the equation
¢G°  nF e°
Since two electrons are transferred per atom in the reaction, 2 moles of electrons are required per mole of reactants and products. Thus n  2 mol e, F  96,485 C/mol e,
and e°  0.78 V  0.78 J/C. Therefore,
¢G°  12 mol e 2 a96,485

C
J
ba0.78 b
mol e
C

 1.5  105 J
The process is spontaneous, as indicated by both the negative sign of G and the positive sign of e°cell.
This reaction is used industrially to deposit copper metal from solutions resulting
from the dissolving of copper ores.
See Exercises 17.37 and 17.38.

17.4 Dependence of Cell Potential on Concentration

Sample Exercise 17.4

803

Predicting Spontaneity
Using the data from Table 17.1, predict whether 1 M HNO3 will dissolve gold metal to
form a 1 M Au3 solution.
Solution
The half-reaction for HNO3 acting as an oxidizing agent is

e° 1cathode2  0.96 V

NO3  4H  3e ¡ NO  2H2O

3

The reaction for the oxidation of solid gold to Au
Au ¡ Au3  3e

ions is

e° 1anode2  1.50 V

The sum of these half-reactions gives the required reaction:
Au1s2  NO3 1aq2  4H 1aq2 ¡ Au3 1aq2  NO1g2  2H2O1l2
and

e°cell  e° 1cathode2  e° 1anode2  0.96 V  1.50 V  0.54 V

Since the e° value is negative, the process will not occur under standard conditions. That
is, gold will not dissolve in 1 M HNO3 to give 1 M Au3. In fact, a mixture (1:3 by volume)
of concentrated nitric and hydrochloric acids, called aqua regia, is required to dissolve gold.
A gold ring does not dissolve in nitric acid.

See Exercises 17.37 and 17.38.

17.4

Dependence of Cell Potential on Concentration

So far we have described cells under standard conditions. In this section we consider the
dependence of the cell potential on concentration. Under standard conditions (all concentrations 1 M), the cell with the reaction
Cu1s2  2Ce 4 1aq2 ¡ Cu 2 1aq2  2Ce 3 1aq2
has a potential of 1.36 V. What will the cell potential be if [Ce4] is greater than 1.0 M?
This question can be answered qualitatively in terms of Le Châtelier’s principle. An increase in the concentration of Ce4 will favor the forward reaction and thus increase the
driving force on the electrons. The cell potential will increase. On the other hand, an increase in the concentration of a product (Cu2 or Ce3 ) will oppose the forward reaction,
thus decreasing the cell potential.
These ideas are illustrated in Sample Exercise 17.5.
Sample Exercise 17.5

The Effects of Concentration on e
For the cell reaction
2Al1s2  3Mn2 1aq2 ¡ 2Al3 1aq2  3Mn1s2

e°cell  0.48 V

predict whether ecell is larger or smaller than e°cell for the following cases.
a. 3 Al3 4  2.0 M, 3Mn2 4  1.0 M
b. 3Al3 4  1.0 M, 3Mn2 4  3.0 M
Solution
a. A product concentration has been raised above 1.0 M. This will oppose the cell reaction and will cause ecell to be less than e°cell (ecell  0.48 V).
b. A reactant concentration has been increased above 1.0 M, and ecell will be greater than
e°cell (ecell  0.48 V).
A concentration cell with 1.0 M Cu2 on
the right and 0.010 M Cu2 on the left.

See Exercise 17.51.

804

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
e–

e–

e–

Concentration Cells
e–

Porous
disk

Ag

Ag

0.1 M Ag+
0.1 M NO3–

1 M Ag+
1 M NO3–

Anode

Cathode

Because cell potentials depend on concentration, we can construct galvanic cells where
both compartments contain the same components but at different concentrations. For example, in the cell in Fig. 17.9, both compartments contain aqueous AgNO3, but with different molarities. Let’s consider the potential of this cell and the direction of electron ﬂow.
The half-reaction relevant to both compartments of this cell is
Ag  e ¡ Ag

e°  0.80 V

If the cell had 1 M Ag in both compartments,
e°cell  0.80 V  0.80 V  0 V

FIGURE 17.9
A concentration cell that contains a silver
electrode and aqueous silver nitrate in
both compartments. Because the right
compartment contains 1 M Ag and the
left compartment contains 0.1 M Ag,
there will be a driving force to transfer
electrons from left to right. Silver will be
deposited on the right electrode, thus
lowering the concentration of Ag in the
right compartment. In the left compartment the silver electrode dissolves
(producing Ag ions) to raise the
concentration of Ag in solution.

Sample Exercise 17.6

However, in the cell described here, the concentrations of Ag in the two compartments
are 1 M and 0.1 M. Because the concentrations of Ag are unequal, the half-cell
potentials will not be identical, and the cell will exhibit a positive voltage. In which
direction will the electrons ﬂow in this cell? The best way to think about this question
is to recognize that nature will try to equalize the concentrations of Ag in the two
compartments. This can be done by transferring electrons from the compartment
containing 0.1 M Ag to the one containing 1 M Ag (left to right in Fig. 17.9). This
electron transfer will produce more Ag in the left compartment and consume Ag (to
form Ag) in the right compartment.
A cell in which both compartments have the same components but at different concentrations is called a concentration cell. The difference in concentration is the only factor
that produces a cell potential in this case, and the voltages are typically small.

Concentration Cells
Determine the direction of electron ﬂow and designate the anode and cathode for the cell
represented in Fig. 17.10.
Solution

Porous
disk

Fe

0.01 M Fe2+

Fe

0.1 M Fe2+

The concentrations of Fe 2 ion in the two compartments can (eventually) be equalized
by transferring electrons from the left compartment to the right. This will cause Fe 2
to be formed in the left compartment, and iron metal will be deposited (by reducing
Fe 2 ions to Fe) on the right electrode. Since electron ﬂow is from left to right, oxidation occurs in the left compartment (the anode) and reduction occurs in the right (the
cathode).
See Exercise 17.52.

FIGURE 17.10
A concentration cell containing iron
electrodes and different concentrations of
Fe2 ion in the two compartments.

The Nernst Equation
The dependence of the cell potential on concentration results directly from the dependence of free energy on concentration. Recall from Chapter 16 that the equation
¢G  ¢G°  RT ln1Q2
where Q is the reaction quotient, was used to calculate the effect of concentration on G.
Since ¢G  nF e and ¢G°  nF e°, the equation becomes
nFe  nFe°  RT ln1Q2
Dividing each side of the equation by nF gives
e  e° 

RT
ln1Q2
nF

(17.1)

17.4 Dependence of Cell Potential on Concentration
Nernst was one of the pioneers in the
development of electrochemical theory
and is generally given credit for ﬁrst
stating the third law of thermodynamics.
He won the Nobel Prize in chemistry in
1920.

805

Equation (17.1), which gives the relationship between the cell potential and the concentrations of the cell components, is commonly called the Nernst equation, after the German
chemist Walther Hermann Nernst (1864–1941).
The Nernst equation is often given in a form that is valid at 25C:
e  e° 

0.0591
log1Q2
n

Using this relationship, we can calculate the potential of a cell in which some or all of
the components are not in their standard states.
For example, e°cell is 0.48 V for the galvanic cell based on the reaction
2Al1s2  3Mn2 1aq2 ¡ 2Al3 1aq2  3Mn1s2

Consider a cell in which
3Mn2 4  0.50 M and

3Al3 4  1.50 M

The cell potential at 25C for these concentrations can be calculated using the Nernst
equation:
ecell  e°cell 

0.0591
log1Q2
n

We know that
e°cell  0.48 V

Q

and

3Al3 4 2

3Mn 4

2 3



11.502 2

10.502 3

 18

Since the half-reactions are
Oxidation:
Reduction:

2Al ¡ 2Al3  6e
3Mn2  6e ¡ 3Mn

we know that
n6
Thus

0.0591
log1182
6
0.0591
 0.48 
11.262  0.48  0.01  0.47 V
6

ecell  0.48 

Note that the cell voltage decreases slightly because of the nonstandard concentrations.
This change is consistent with the predictions of Le Châtelier’s principle (see Sample
Exercise 17.5). In this case, since the reactant concentration is lower than 1.0 M and
the product concentration is higher than 1.0 M, ecell is less than e°cell.
The potential calculated from the Nernst equation is the maximum potential before
any current ﬂow has occurred. As the cell discharges and current ﬂows from anode to
cathode, the concentrations will change, and as a result, ecell will change. In fact, the cell
will spontaneously discharge until it reaches equilibrium, at which point
Q  K 1the equilibrium constant2

and ecell  0

A “dead” battery is one in which the cell reaction has reached equilibrium, and there
is no longer any chemical driving force to push electrons through the wire. In other words,
at equilibrium, the components in the two cell compartments have the same free energy,
and G  0 for the cell reaction at the equilibrium concentrations. The cell no longer has
the ability to do work.

806

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

Sample Exercise 17.7

The Nernst Equation
Describe the cell based on the following half-reactions:
VO2  2H  e ¡ VO2  H2O
Zn2  2e ¡ Zn

e°  1.00 V
e°  0.76 V

(1)
(2)

T  25°C
3VO2 4  2.0 M
3H 4  0.50 M
3VO2 4  1.0  102 M
3Zn2 4  1.0  101 M

where

Solution
The balanced cell reaction is obtained by reversing reaction (2) and multiplying reaction
(1) by 2:
2  reaction 112

Reaction 122 reversed

Cell reaction:

2VO2  4H  2e ¡ 2VO2  2H2O
Zn ¡ Zn2  2e

2VO2 1aq2  4H 1aq2  Zn1s2 ¡ 2VO2 1aq2  2H2O1l2  Zn2 1aq2

e° 1cathode2  1.00 V
e° 1anode2  0.76 V
e°cell  1.76 V

Since the cell contains components at concentrations other than 1 M, we must use the
Nernst equation, where n  2 (since two electrons are transferred), to calculate the cell
potential. At 25C we can use the equation
0.0591
log 1Q2
n
3Zn2 4 3 VO2 4 2
0.0591
 1.76 
log a
b
2
3VO2 4 2 3H 4 4
11.0  101 211.0  102 2 2
0.0591
 1.76 
log a
b
2
12.02 2 10.502 4
0.0591
 1.76 
log 14  105 2  1.76  0.13  1.89 V
2

e  e°cell 

The cell diagram is given in Fig. 17.11.

cell

e–

= 1.89 V
e–

e–

e–

Zn

Pt

[Zn2+] =
0.1 M

FIGURE 17.11
Schematic diagram of the cell described in
Sample Exercise 17.7.

Anode

[VO 2+] =
1.0 × 10–2 M
[VO2+] = 2.0 M
[H+] = 0.50 M
Cathode

See Exercises 17.55 through 17.58.

17.4 Dependence of Cell Potential on Concentration

807

Reference solution of
dilute hydrochloric acid

FIGURE 17.12
A glass electrode contains a reference
solution of dilute hydrochloric acid in
contact with a thin glass membrane in
which a silver wire coated with silver
chloride has been embedded. When the
electrode is dipped into a solution
containing H ions, the electrode potential
is determined by the difference in [H]
between the two solutions.

Silver wire coated with
silver chloride

Thin-walled membrane

Ion-Selective Electrodes

TABLE 17.2 Some Ions Whose
Concentrations Can Be Detected
by Ion-Selective Electrodes
Cations

Anions

H
Cd2
Ca2
Cu2
K
Ag
Na

Br
Cl
CN
F
NO3
S2

Because the cell potential is sensitive to the concentrations of the reactants and products
involved in the cell reaction, measured potentials can be used to determine the concentration of an ion. A pH meter (see Fig. 14.9) is a familiar example of an instrument that
measures concentration using an observed potential. The pH meter has three main components: a standard electrode of known potential, a special glass electrode that changes
potential depending on the concentration of H ions in the solution into which it is dipped,
and a potentiometer that measures the potential between the electrodes. The potentiometer reading is automatically converted electronically to a direct reading of the pH of the
solution being tested.
The glass electrode (see Fig. 17.12) contains a reference solution of dilute hydrochloric
acid in contact with a thin glass membrane. The electrical potential of the glass electrode
depends on the difference in [H] between the reference solution and the solution into
which the electrode is dipped. Thus the electrical potential varies with the pH of the solution being tested.
Electrodes that are sensitive to the concentration of a particular ion are called ionselective electrodes, of which the glass electrode for pH measurement is just one example.
Glass electrodes can be made sensitive to such ions as Na, K, or NH4 by changing
the composition of the glass. Other ions can be detected if an appropriate crystal replaces
the glass membrane. For example, a crystal of lanthanum(III) ﬂuoride (LaF3) can be used
in an electrode to measure [F]. Solid silver sulﬁde (Ag2S) can be used to measure [Ag]
and [S2]. Some of the ions that can be detected by ion-selective electrodes are listed in
Table 17.2.

Calculation of Equilibrium Constants for Redox Reactions
The quantitative relationship between e° and G allows calculation of equilibrium constants for redox reactions. For a cell at equilibrium,
ecell  0 and Q  K
Applying these conditions to the Nernst equation valid at 25C,
e  e° 

0.0591
log1Q2
n

808

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

0  e° 

gives

log1K2 

or

Sample Exercise 17.8

0.0591
log1K2
n

ne°
0.0591

at 25°C

Equilibrium Constants from Cell Potentials
For the oxidation–reduction reaction
S4O62 1aq2  Cr2 1aq2 ¡ Cr3 1aq2  S2O32 1aq2
the appropriate half-reactions are
S4O62  2e ¡ 2S2O32
Cr3  e ¡ Cr2

e°  0.17 V
e°  0.50 V

(1)
(2)

Balance the redox reaction, and calculate e° and K (at 25C).
Solution
To obtain the balanced reaction, we must reverse reaction (2), multiply it by 2, and add
it to reaction (1):
Reaction 112
2  reaction 122 reversed

Cell reaction:

e° 1cathode2  0.17 V

S4O62  2e ¡ 2S2O32

2Cr 1aq2 
2

21Cr 2 ¡ Cr3  e 2

S4O62 1aq2

¡ 2Cr 1aq2 
3

2S2O32 1aq2

e° 1anode2  10.502 V
e°  0.67 V

In this reaction, 2 moles of electrons are transferred for every unit of reaction, that
is, for every 2 mol Cr2 reacting with 1 mol S4O62 to form 2 mol Cr3 and 2 mol S2O32.
Thus n  2. Then
log1K2 

210.672
ne°

 22.6
0.0591
0.0591

The value of K is found by taking the antilog of 22.6:
K  1022.6  4  1022
This very large equilibrium constant is not unusual for a redox reaction.
The blue solution contains Cr2 ions, and
the green solution contains Cr3 ions.

See Exercises 17.65, 17.66, 17.69, and 17.70.

17.5

Batteries

A battery is a galvanic cell or, more commonly, a group of galvanic cells connected in
series, where the potentials of the individual cells add to give the total battery potential. Batteries are a source of direct current and have become an essential source of
portable power in our society. In this section we examine the most common types of
batteries. Some new batteries currently being developed are described at the end of the
chapter.

Lead Storage Battery
Since about 1915 when self-starters were ﬁrst used in automobiles, the lead storage battery has been a major factor in making the automobile a practical means of transportation. This type of battery can function for several years under temperature extremes from
30F to 120F and under incessant punishment from rough roads.

17.5 Batteries

809

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Printed Batteries
oon you may reach for a compact disc in your local record store and, as you touch it, the package
will start playing one of the songs on the disc. Or you
may stop to look at a product because the package
begins to glow as you pass it in the store. These effects
could happen soon thanks to the invention of a ﬂexible, superthin battery that can actually be printed onto
the package. This battery was developed by Power
Paper, Ltd., a company founded by Baruch Levanon
and several colleagues.
The battery developed by Power Paper consists
of ﬁve layers of zinc (anode) and manganese dioxide
(cathode) and is only 0.5 millimeter thick. The battery
can be printed onto paper with a regular printing press
and appears to present no environmental hazards.
The new battery has been licensed by International Paper Company, which intends to use it to bring
light, sound, and other special effects to packaging to
A CD case with an ultrathin battery that can be “printed” on packages like ink.
entice potential customers. You might see talking,
singing, or glowing packages on the shelves within a
year or two.

–

+

S

In this battery, lead serves as the anode, and lead coated with lead dioxide serves as
the cathode. Both electrodes dip into an electrolyte solution of sulfuric acid. The electrode reactions are
Anode reaction:
Cathode reaction:

PbO2  HSO4

Pb  HSO4 ¡ PbSO4  H  2e
 3H  2e ¡ PbSO4  2H2O

Cell reaction: Pb1s2  PbO2 1s2  2H 1aq2  2HSO4 1aq2 ¡ 2PbSO4 1s2  2H2O1l2
H2SO4
electrolyte
solution

Anode (lead
grid filled with
spongy lead)

Cathode (lead
grid filled with
spongy PbO2)

FIGURE 17.13
One of the six cells in a 12-V lead storage
battery. The anode consists of a lead grid
ﬁlled with spongy lead, and the cathode is
a lead grid ﬁlled with lead dioxide. The cell
also contains 38% (by mass) sulfuric acid.

The typical automobile lead storage battery has six cells connected in series. Each
cell contains multiple electrodes in the form of grids (Fig. 17.13) and produces
approximately 2 V, to give a total battery potential of about 12 V. Note from the cell
reaction that sulfuric acid is consumed as the battery discharges. This lowers the density of the electrolyte solution from its initial value of about 1.28 g/cm3 in the
fully charged battery. As a result, the condition of the battery can be monitored by
measuring the density of the sulfuric acid solution. The solid lead sulfate formed in the
cell reaction during discharge adheres to the grid surfaces of the electrodes. The battery is recharged by forcing current through it in the opposite direction to reverse the
cell reaction. A car’s battery is continuously charged by an alternator driven by the
automobile engine.
An automobile with a dead battery can be “jump-started” by connecting its battery
to the battery in a running automobile. This process can be dangerous, however, because the resulting ﬂow of current causes electrolysis of water in the dead battery, producing hydrogen and oxygen gases (see Section 17.7 for details). Disconnecting the
jumper cables after the disabled car starts causes an arc that can ignite the gaseous

810

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Thermophotovoltaics: Electricity from Heat
photovoltaic cell transforms the energy of sunlight into
an electric current. These devices are used to power calculators, electric signs in rural areas, experimental cars, and
an increasing number of other devices. But what happens at
night or on cloudy days? Usually photovoltaic power sources
employ a battery as a reserve energy source when light levels are low.
Now there is an emerging technology, called thermophotovoltaics (TPV), that uses a heat source instead of
the sun for energy. These devices can operate at night or on
an overcast day without a battery. Although TPV devices
could use many different sources of heat, the examples currently under development use a propane burner. To produce
an electric current, the radiant heat from the burner is used
to excite a “radiator,” a device that emits infrared (IR) radiation when heated. The emitted IR radiation then falls on a
“converter,” which is a semiconductor that contains p–n
junctions. The IR radiation excites electrons from valence
bands to conduction bands in the semiconductor so that the
electrons can ﬂow as a current. A schematic of a TPV generator is illustrated in the diagram.

A

Anode
(zinc inner case)
Cathode
(graphite rod)
Paste of MnO2 ,
NH4Cl, and
carbon

FIGURE 17.14
A common dry cell battery.

TPV technology has advanced recently because researchers have found that it is possible to use radiators such
as silicon carbide, which can operate at relatively low temperatures (approximately 1000°C ), with III–V semiconductor converters such as gallium antimonide (GSb) or gallium
arsenide (GaAs). While development work continues on
many fronts, the ﬁrst commercial TPV product is being marketed by JX Crystals of Issaquah, Washington. The product—Midnight Sun—is a propane-powered TPV generator
that can produce 30 watts of electricity and is intended for
use on boats to charge the batteries that power navigation
and other essential equipment. Although at $3000 the TPV
generator is more expensive than a conventional dieselpowered generator, Midnight Sun is silent and more reliable
because it has no moving parts.
Although TPV technology is still in its infancy, it has
many possible uses. The utilization of industrial waste
heat—generated by glass and steel manufacturing and other
industries—could establish a huge market for TPV. For example, two-thirds of the energy used in the manufacture of
glass ends up as waste heat. If a signiﬁcant quantity of this

mixture. If this happens, the battery may explode, ejecting corrosive sulfuric acid. This
problem can be avoided by connecting the ground jumper cable to a part of the engine
remote from the battery. Any arc produced when this cable is disconnected will then be
harmless.
Traditional types of storage batteries require periodic “topping off ” because the water in the electrolyte solution is depleted by the electrolysis that accompanies the charging process. Recent types of batteries have electrodes made of an alloy of calcium and
lead that inhibits the electrolysis of water. These batteries can be sealed, since they require no addition of water.
It is rather amazing that in the 85 years in which lead storage batteries have been
used, no better system has been found. Although a lead storage battery does provide excellent service, it has a useful lifetime of 3 to 5 years in an automobile. While it might
seem that the battery could undergo an indeﬁnite number of discharge/charge cycles, physical damage from road shock and chemical side-reactions eventually cause it to fail.

Other Batteries
The calculators, electronic games, digital watches, and portable CD players that are so familiar to us are all powered by small, efﬁcient batteries. The common dry cell battery
was invented more than 100 years ago by George Leclanché (1839–1882), a French
chemist. In its acid version, the dry cell battery contains a zinc inner case that acts as the
anode and a carbon rod in contact with a moist paste of solid MnO2, solid NH4Cl, and
carbon that acts as the cathode (Fig. 17.14). The half-reactions are complex but can be

17.5 Batteries

Room heat
Exhaust

Radiator
Photovoltaic
converter cells

Cooling fins

Quartz shield

Window

Burner

Propane intake

Combustion
air

811

now wasted energy could be used to
produce electricity, this would have
tremendous ﬁscal implications.
Another promising application of
TPV technology is for cars with hybrid
energy sources. For example, an experimental electric car built at Western
Washington University uses a 10-kW
TPV generator to supplement the batteries that serve as the main power
source.
Projections indicate that TPV devices could account for $500 million
in sales by 2005, mainly by substituting TPV generators for small dieselpowered generators used on boats and
by the military in the ﬁeld. It appears
that this technology has a hot future.

Cooling air
Cooling fan

Diagram of a TPV generator.

approximated as follows:
Anode reaction:
Zn ¡ Zn2  2e
Cathode reaction: 2NH4  2MnO2  2e ¡ Mn2O3  2NH3  H2O
This cell produces a potential of about 1.5 V.
In the alkaline version of the dry cell battery, the solid NH4Cl is replaced with KOH
or NaOH. In this case the half-reactions can be approximated as follows:
Anode reaction:
Zn  2OH ¡ ZnO  H2O  2e
Cathode reaction: 2MnO2  H2O  2e ¡ Mn2O3  2OH
The alkaline dry cell lasts longer mainly because the zinc anode corrodes less rapidly
under basic conditions than under acidic conditions.
Other types of useful batteries include the silver cell, which has a Zn anode and a
cathode that employs Ag2O as the oxidizing agent in a basic environment. Mercury cells,
often used in calculators, have a Zn anode and a cathode involving HgO as the oxidizing
agent in a basic medium (see Fig. 17.15).
An especially important type of battery is the nickel–cadmium battery, in which the
electrode reactions are
Anode reaction:
Cd  2OH ¡ Cd1OH2 2  2e
Cathode reaction: NiO2  2H2O  2e ¡ Ni1OH2 2  2OH
Batteries for electronic watches are, by
necessity, very tiny.

As in the lead storage battery, the products adhere to the electrodes. Therefore, a nickel–
cadmium battery can be recharged an indeﬁnite number of times.

812

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Fuel Cells for Cars
our next car may be powered by a fuel
cell. Until recently only affordable to
NASA, fuel cells are now ready to become
practical power plants in cars. Many car
companies are testing vehicles that should
be commercially available by 2004 or 2005.
All of these vehicles are powered by hydrogen–oxygen fuel cells (see Fig. 17.16).
One of the most common types of
fuel cells for automobiles uses a protonexchange membrane (PEM). When H2 releases electrons at the anode, H+ ions form
and then travel through the membrane to
the cathode, where they combine with O2
and electrons to form water. This cell generates about 0.7 V of power. To achieve
the desired power level, several cells are
stacked in series. Fuel cells of this type
have appeared in several prototype vehi- A gathering of several cars powered by fuel cells at Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum.
cles, such as Nissan’s Xterra FCV, Ford’s
Focus FCV, and DaimlerChrysler’s Mercedes Benz NECAR (ECD) of Troy, Michigan, is developing a storage system
5 (see photo).
based on a magnesium alloy that absorbs H2 to form a magThe main question yet to be answered deals with nesium hydride. The H2 gas can be released from this solid
whether the fuel cells in these cars will be fueled by H2 by heating it to 300°C. According to ECD, the alloy can be
stored on board or by H2 made from gasoline or methanol fully charged with H2 in about 5 minutes, achieving a hyas it is needed. The latter systems include an onboard re- drogen density of 103 g/L. This density compares to 71 g/L
former that uses catalysts to produce H2 from other fuels. for liquid hydrogen and 31 g/L for gaseous hydrogen at 5000
The on-board storage of hydrogen could take place in a tank psi. ECD claims its storage system furnishes enough H2 to
at high pressure (approximately 5000 psi) or it could utilize power a fuel-cell car for 300 miles of driving.
a metal-hydride–based solid. Energy Conversion Devices
Clearly, fuel-cell–powered cars are on the near horizon.

Y

Fuel Cells
A fuel cell is a galvanic cell for which the reactants are continuously supplied. To illustrate the principles of fuel cells, let’s consider the exothermic redox reaction of methane
with oxygen:
CH4 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1g2  energy

Cathode (steel)
Insulation
Anode (zinc container)

FIGURE 17.15
A mercury battery of the type used in
calculators.

Paste of HgO (oxidizing
agent) in a basic medium
of KOH and Zn(OH)2

17.6 Corrosion
e–
e–

H2(g)

e–

K+
OH –

O2(g)

H2 O

813

Usually the energy from this reaction is released as heat to warm homes and to run machines. However, in a fuel cell designed to use this reaction, the energy is used to produce an electric current: The electrons ﬂow from the reducing agent (CH4) to the oxidizing agent (O2) through a conductor.
The U.S. space program has supported extensive research to develop fuel cells. The
space shuttle uses a fuel cell based on the reaction of hydrogen and oxygen to form water:
2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1l2
A schematic of a fuel cell that employs this reaction is shown in Fig. 17.16. The halfreactions are
Anode reaction:
2H2  4OH ¡ 4H2O  4e
Cathode reaction: 4e  O2  2H2O ¡ 4OH

Steam

Porous carbon
electrodes
containing
catalysts

FIGURE 17.16
Schematic of the hydrogen–oxygen
fuel cell.

A cell of this type weighing about 500 pounds has been designed for space vehicles, but
this fuel cell is not practical enough for general use as a source of portable power. However, current research on portable electrochemical power is now proceeding at a rapid
pace. In fact, cars powered by fuel cells are now being tested on the streets.
Fuel cells are also ﬁnding use as permanent power sources. For example, a power
plant built in New York City contains stacks of hydrogen–oxygen fuel cells, which can be
rapidly put on-line in response to ﬂuctuating power demands. The hydrogen gas is obtained by decomposing the methane in natural gas. A plant of this type also has been constructed in Tokyo.
In addition, new fuel cells are under development that can use fuels such as methane
and diesel directly without having to produce hydrogen ﬁrst.

17.6

Some metals, such as copper, gold, silver,
and platinum, are relatively difﬁcult to
oxidize. These are often called noble
metals.

Corrosion

Corrosion can be viewed as the process of returning metals to their natural state—the
ores from which they were originally obtained. Corrosion involves oxidation of the metal.
Since corroded metal often loses its structural integrity and attractiveness, this spontaneous process has great economic impact. Approximately one-ﬁfth of the iron and steel
produced annually is used to replace rusted metal.
Metals corrode because they oxidize easily. Table 17.1 shows that, with the exception of gold, those metals commonly used for structural and decorative purposes all have
standard reduction potentials less positive than that of oxygen gas. When any of these
half-reactions is reversed (to show oxidation of the metal) and combined with the reduction half-reaction for oxygen, the result is a positive e° value. Thus the oxidation of most
metals by oxygen is spontaneous (although we cannot tell from the potential how fast it
will occur).
In view of the large difference in reduction potentials between oxygen and most metals, it is surprising that the problem of corrosion does not completely prevent the use of
metals in air. However, most metals develop a thin oxide coating, which tends to protect
their internal atoms against further oxidation. The metal that best demonstrates this phenomenon is aluminum. With a reduction potential of 1.7 V, aluminum should be easily
oxidized by O2. According to the apparent thermodynamics of the reaction, an aluminum
airplane could dissolve in a rainstorm. The fact that this very active metal can be used as
a structural material is due to the formation of a thin, adherent layer of aluminum oxide
(Al2O3), more properly represented as Al2(OH)6, which greatly inhibits further corrosion.
The potential of the “passive,” oxide-coated aluminum is 0.6 V, a value that causes it to
behave much like a noble metal.
Iron also can form a protective oxide coating. This coating is not an infallible shield
against corrosion, however; when steel is exposed to oxygen in moist air, the oxide that
forms tends to scale off and expose new metal surfaces to corrosion.

814

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Paint That Stops Rust—Completely
raditionally, paint has provided the most economical
method for protecting steel against corrosion. However, as
people who live in the Midwest know well, paint cannot prevent a car from rusting indeﬁnitely. Eventually, ﬂaws develop
in the paint that allow the ravages of rusting to take place.
This situation may soon change. Chemists at Glidden
Research Center in Ohio have developed a paint called Rustmaster Pro that worked so well to prevent rusting in its initial tests that the scientists did not believe their results. Steel
coated with the new paint showed no signs of rusting after
an astonishing 10,000 hours of exposure in a salt spray
chamber at 38°C.
Rustmaster is a water-based polymer formulation that
prevents corrosion in two different ways. First, the polymer
layer that cures in air forms a barrier impenetrable to both
oxygen and water vapor. Second, the chemicals in the coating react with the steel surface to produce an interlayer
between the metal and the polymer coating. This interlayer
is a complex mineral called pyroaurite that contains cations

T

of the form [M1xZx(OH)2]x, where M is a 2 ion (Mg2,
Fe2, Zn2, Co2, or Ni2), Z is a 3 ion (Al3, Fe3, Mn3,
Co3, or Ni3), and x is a number between 0 and 1. The anions in pyroaurite are typically CO32, Cl, and/or SO42.
This pyroaurite interlayer is the real secret of the paint’s
effectiveness. Because the corrosion of steel has an electrochemical mechanism, motion of ions must be possible between the cathodic and anodic areas on the surface of the
steel for rusting to occur. However, the pyroaurite interlayer
grows into the neighboring polymer layer, thus preventing
this crucial movement of ions. In effect, this layer prevents
corrosion in the same way that removing the salt bridge
prevents current from ﬂowing in a galvanic cell.
In addition to having an extraordinary corrosionﬁghting ability, Rustmaster yields an unusually small
quantity of volatile solvents as it dries. A typical paint can
produce from 1 to 5 kg of volatiles per gallon; Rustmaster
produces only 0.05 kg. This paint may signal a new era in
corrosion prevention.

The corrosion products of noble metals such as copper and silver are complex and
affect the use of these metals as decorative materials. Under normal atmospheric conditions, copper forms an external layer of greenish copper carbonate called patina. Silver
tarnish is silver sulﬁde (Ag2S), which in thin layers gives the silver surface a richer appearance. Gold, with a positive standard reduction potential of 1.50 V, signiﬁcantly larger
than that for oxygen (1.23 V), shows no appreciable corrosion in air.

Corrosion of Iron
Since steel is the main structural material for bridges, buildings, and automobiles, controlling its corrosion is extremely important. To do this, we must understand the corrosion mechanism. Instead of being a direct oxidation process as we might expect, the
corrosion of iron is an electrochemical reaction, as shown in Fig. 17.17.

Water droplet
Rust

O2

2+

Fe
Anodic
area
Iron dissolves
forming a pit

FIGURE 17.17
The electrochemical corrosion of iron.

(Anode reaction: Fe

Fe2+ + 2e– )

e–
Cathodic area

(Cathode reaction: O2 + 2H2O + 4e–

4OH – )

17.6 Corrosion

815

Steel has a nonuniform surface because the chemical composition is not completely
homogeneous. Also, physical strains leave stress points in the metal. These nonuniformities cause areas where the iron is more easily oxidized (anodic regions) than it is at others (cathodic regions). In the anodic regions each iron atom gives up two electrons to form
the Fe 2 ion:
Fe ¡ Fe 2  2e 
The electrons that are released ﬂow through the steel, as they do through the wire of a
galvanic cell, to a cathodic region, where they react with oxygen:
O2  2H2O  4e  ¡ 4OH
The Fe 2 ions formed in the anodic regions travel to the cathodic regions through the
moisture on the surface of the steel, just as ions travel through a salt bridge in a galvanic
cell. In the cathodic regions Fe 2 ions react with oxygen to form rust, which is hydrated
iron(III) oxide of variable composition:
4Fe 2 1aq2  O2 1g2  14  2n2 H2O 1l2 ¡ 2Fe2O3  nH2O 1s2  8H  1aq2
Rust

Because of the migration of ions and electrons, rust often forms at sites that are remote from those where the iron dissolved to form pits in the steel. The degree of hydration of the iron oxide affects the color of the rust, which may vary from black to yellow
to the familiar reddish brown.
The electrochemical nature of the rusting of iron explains the importance of moisture in the corrosion process. Moisture must be present to act as a kind of salt bridge
between anodic and cathodic regions. Steel does not rust in dry air, a fact that explains
why cars last much longer in the arid Southwest than in the relatively humid Midwest.
Salt also accelerates rusting, a fact all too easily recognized by car owners in the colder
parts of the United States, where salt is used on roads to melt snow and ice. The severity
of rusting is greatly increased because the dissolved salt on the moist steel surface increases the conductivity of the aqueous solution formed there and thus accelerates the
electrochemical corrosion process. Chloride ions also form very stable complex ions
with Fe3, and this factor tends to encourage the dissolving of the iron, again accelerating
the corrosion.

Prevention of Corrosion
Prevention of corrosion is an important way of conserving our natural resources of energy and metals. The primary means of protection is the application of a coating, most
commonly paint or metal plating, to protect the metal from oxygen and moisture.
Chromium and tin are often used to plate steel (see Section 17.8) because they oxidize to
form a durable, effective oxide coating. Zinc, also used to coat steel in a process called
galvanizing, forms a mixed oxide–carbonate coating. Since zinc is a more active metal
than iron, as the potentials for the oxidation half-reactions show,
Fe ¡ Fe2  2e
Zn ¡ Zn2  2e

e°  0.44 V
e°  0.76 V

any oxidation that occurs dissolves zinc rather than iron. Recall that the reaction with the
most positive standard potential has the greatest thermodynamic tendency to occur. Thus
zinc acts as a “sacriﬁcial” coating on steel.
Alloying is also used to prevent corrosion. Stainless steel contains chromium and
nickel, both of which form oxide coatings that change steel’s reduction potential to one
characteristic of the noble metals. In addition, a new technology is now being developed

816

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
Ground level

Cathode (buried iron pipe)
Connecting
insulated wire

FIGURE 17.18
Cathodic protection of an underground
pipe.

Anode
(magnesium)

Electrolyte
(moist soil)

to create surface alloys. That is, instead of forming a metal alloy such as stainless steel,
which has the same composition throughout, a cheaper carbon steel is treated by ion bombardment to produce a thin layer of stainless steel or other desirable alloy on the surface.
In this process, a “plasma” or “ion gas” of the alloying ions is formed at high temperatures and is then directed onto the surface of the metal.
Cathodic protection is a method most often employed to protect steel in buried fuel
tanks and pipelines. An active metal, such as magnesium, is connected by a wire to the
pipeline or tank to be protected (Fig. 17.18). Because the magnesium is a better reducing
agent than iron, electrons are furnished by the magnesium rather than by the iron, keeping the iron from being oxidized. As oxidation occurs, the magnesium anode dissolves,
and so it must be replaced periodically. Ships’ hulls are protected in a similar way by attaching bars of titanium metal to the steel hull (Fig. 17.18). In salt water the titanium acts
as the anode and is oxidized instead of the steel hull (the cathode).

17.7
An electrolytic cell uses electrical energy
to produce a chemical change that would
otherwise not occur spontaneously.

Electrolysis

A galvanic cell produces current when an oxidation–reduction reaction proceeds spontaneously. A similar apparatus, an electrolytic cell, uses electrical energy to produce
chemical change. The process of electrolysis involves forcing a current through a cell to
produce a chemical change for which the cell potential is negative; that is, electrical work
causes an otherwise nonspontaneous chemical reaction to occur. Electrolysis has great
practical importance; for example, charging a battery, producing aluminum metal, and
chrome plating an object are all done electrolytically.
To illustrate the difference between a galvanic cell and an electrolytic cell, consider
the cell shown in Fig. 17.19(a) as it runs spontaneously to produce 1.10 V. In this galvanic
cell the reaction at the anode is
Zn ¡ Zn 2  2e 
whereas at the cathode the reaction is
Cu 2  2e  ¡ Cu

1 A  1 C/s

Figure 17.19(b) shows an external power source forcing electrons through the cell in
the opposite direction to that in (a). This requires an external potential greater than 1.10 V,
which must be applied in opposition to the natural cell potential. This device is an electrolytic cell. Notice that since electron ﬂow is opposite in the two cases, the anode and
cathode are reversed between (a) and (b). Also, ion ﬂow through the salt bridge is opposite in the two cells.
Now we will consider the stoichiometry of electrolytic processes, that is, how much
chemical change occurs with the ﬂow of a given current for a speciﬁed time. Suppose we
wish to determine the mass of copper that is plated out when a current of 10.0 amps

817

17.7 Electrolysis

e–

e–

e–
e–

e–
Zn(s)

e–
e–

e–
Zn(s)

Cu(s)

Zn2 + Cations
SO42 –

Power source
greater than
1.10 V

Cu(s)

Cu2 +
SO42 –

Zn2 +
SO42 –

1.0 M Zn2 +
solution

1.0 M Cu2 +
solution

1.0 M Zn2 +
solution

1.0 M Cu2 +
solution

Anode

Cathode

Cathode

Anode

Anions

(a)

Cations
Anions

Cu2 +
SO42 –

(b)

FIGURE 17.19
(a) A standard galvanic cell based on the spontaneous reaction
Zn  Cu 2 ¡ Zn 2  Cu
(b) A standard electrolytic cell. A power source forces the opposite reaction
Cu  Zn 2 ¡ Cu 2  Zn

(an ampere [amp], abbreviated A, is 1 coulomb of charge per second) is passed for 30.0
minutes through a solution containing Cu 2. Plating means depositing the neutral metal
on the electrode by reducing the metal ions in solution. In this case each Cu 2 ion requires two electrons to become an atom of copper metal:
Cu 2 1aq2  2e  ¡ Cu 1s2
This reduction process will occur at the cathode of the electrolytic cell.
To solve this stoichiometry problem, we need the following steps:
current
and
time

➥ 1

1

S

quantity of
charge in
coulombs

2

S

moles
of
electrons

3

S

moles
of
copper

4

S

grams
of
copper

Since an amp is a coulomb of charge per second, we multiply the current by
the time in seconds to obtain the total coulombs of charge passed into the Cu2
solution at the cathode:
Coulombs of charge  amps  seconds 

C
s
s

s
C
 30.0 min  60.0
s
min
4
 1.80  10 C

 10.0

➥ 2

Since 1 mole of electrons carries a charge of 1 faraday, or 96,485 coulombs, we
can calculate the number of moles of electrons required to carry 1.80  104
coulombs of charge:
1.80  104 C 

1 mol e 
 1.87  10 1 mol e 
96,485 C

This means that 0.187 mole of electrons ﬂowed into the Cu2 solution.

818

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

➥ 3

Each Cu2 ion requires two electrons to become a copper atom. Thus each mole
of electrons produces 12 mole of copper metal:
1.87  10 1 mol e 

➥ 4

1 mol Cu
 9.35  10 2 mol Cu
2 mol e

We now know the moles of copper metal plated onto the cathode, and we can
calculate the mass of copper formed:
9.35  10 2 mol Cu 

Sample Exercise 17.9 describes only the
half-cell of interest. There also must be
an anode at which oxidation is occurring.

Electroplating
How long must a current of 5.00 A be applied to a solution of Ag to produce 10.5 g
silver metal?
Solution
In this case, we must use the steps given earlier in reverse:
grams
of
silver

S

moles
of
silver

S

10.5 g Ag 

moles of
electrons
required

coulombs
of charge
required

S

S

time
required
for plating

1 mol Ag
 9.73  102 mol Ag
107.868 g Ag

Each Ag ion requires one electron to become a silver atom:
Ag  e ¡ Ag
Thus 9.73  102 mol of electrons is required, and we can calculate the quantity of charge
carried by these electrons:
9.73  102 mol e 

96,485 C
 9.39  103 C
mol e

The 5.00 A (5.00 C/s) of current must produce 9.39  103 C of charge. Thus
a5.00
Time 

C
b  1time, in s2  9.39  103 C
s

9.39  103
s  1.88  103 s  31.3 min
5.00
See Exercises 17.77 through 17.80.

Electrolysis of Water
We have seen that hydrogen and oxygen combine spontaneously to form water and that the
accompanying decrease in free energy can be used to run a fuel cell to produce electricity.
The reverse process, which is of course nonspontaneous, can be forced by electrolysis:
Anode reaction:
Cathode reaction:
Net reaction:

2H2O ¡ O2  4H  4e
4H2O  4e ¡ 2H2  4OH

6H2O ¡ 2H2  O2  41H  OH 2

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

Sample Exercise 17.9

63.546 g
 5.94 g Cu
mol Cu

4H2O

or

2H2O ¡ 2H2  O2

e°  1.23 V
e°  0.83 V
e°  2.06 V

17.7 Electrolysis

Visualization: Electrolysis of
Water

819

Note that these potentials assume an anode chamber with 1 M H and a cathode chamber with 1 M OH. In pure water, where [H]  [OH]  107 M, the potential for the
overall process is 1.23 V.
In practice, however, if platinum electrodes connected to a 6-V battery are dipped
into pure water, no reaction is observed because pure water contains so few ions that
only a negligible current can ﬂow. However, addition of even a small amount of a soluble salt causes an immediate evolution of bubbles of hydrogen and oxygen, as illustrated
in Fig. 17.20.

Electrolysis of Mixtures of Ions
Suppose a solution in an electrolytic cell contains the ions Cu2, Ag, and Zn2. If the
voltage is initially very low and is gradually turned up, in which order will the metals be
plated out onto the cathode? This question can be answered by looking at the standard
reduction potentials of these ions:

FIGURE 17.20
The electrolysis of water produces hydrogen
gas at the cathode (on the right) and oxygen gas at the anode (on the left).

Ag  e ¡ Ag
Cu2  2e ¡ Cu
Zn2  2e ¡ Zn

e°  0.80 V
e°  0.34 V
e°  0.76 V

Remember that the more positive the e° value, the more the reaction has a tendency to
proceed in the direction indicated. Of the three reactions listed, the reduction of Ag occurs
most easily, and the order of oxidizing ability is
Ag 7 Cu2 7 Zn2
This means that silver will plate out ﬁrst as the potential is increased, followed by copper, and ﬁnally zinc.

Sample Exercise 17.10

Relative Oxidizing Abilities
An acidic solution contains the ions Ce4, VO2, and Fe3. Using the e° values listed in
Table 17.1, give the order of oxidizing ability of these species and predict which one will
be reduced at the cathode of an electrolytic cell at the lowest voltage.
Solution
The half-reactions and e° values are
VO2



Ce4  e ¡ Ce3
 2H  e ¡ VO2  H2O
Fe3  e ¡ Fe2

e°  1.70 V
e°  1.00 V
e°  0.77 V

The order of oxidizing ability is therefore
Ce 4 7 VO2  7 Fe 3
The Ce4 ion will be reduced at the lowest voltage in an electrolytic cell.
See Exercise 17.89.

The principle described in this section is very useful, but it must be applied with some
caution. For example, in the electrolysis of an aqueous solution of sodium chloride, we
should be able to use e° values to predict the products. Of the major species in the solution

820

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Chemistry of Sunken Treasure
hen the galleon Atocha was destroyed on a reef by a
hurricane in 1622, it was bound for Spain carrying approximately 47 tons of copper, gold, and silver from the New
World. The bulk of the treasure was silver bars and coins
packed in wooden chests. When treasure hunter Mel Fisher
salvaged the silver in 1985, corrosion and marine growth
had transformed the shiny metal into something that looked
like coral. Restoring the silver to its original condition required an understanding of the chemical changes that had
occurred in 350 years of being submerged in the ocean.
Much of this chemistry we have already considered at various places in this text.
As the wooden chests containing the silver decayed, the
oxygen supply was depleted, favoring the growth of certain
bacteria that use the sulfate ion rather than oxygen as an oxidizing agent to generate energy. As these bacteria consume
sulfate ions, they release hydrogen sulﬁde gas that reacts
with silver to form black silver sulﬁde:

W

2Ag1s2  H2S1aq2 ¡ Ag2S1s2  H2 1g2
Thus, over the years, the surface of the silver became covered with a tightly adhering layer of corrosion, which fortunately protected the silver underneath and thus prevented
total conversion of the silver to silver sulﬁde.

Silver coins and tankards salvaged from the wreck of
the Atocha.

(Na, Cl, and H2O), only Cl and H2O can be readily oxidized. The half-reactions (written as oxidization processes) are
2Cl ¡ Cl2  2e
2H2O ¡ O2  4H  4e

e°  1.36 V
e°  1.23 V

Since water has the more positive potential, we would expect to see O2 produced at
the anode because it is easier (thermodynamically) to oxidize H2O than Cl. Actually,
this does not happen. As the voltage is increased in the cell, the Cl ion is the ﬁrst to
be oxidized. A much higher potential than expected is required to oxidize water.
The voltage required in excess of the expected value (called the overvoltage) is much
greater for the production of O2 than for Cl2, which explains why chlorine is produced
ﬁrst.
The causes of overvoltage are very complex. Basically, the phenomenon is caused by
difﬁculties in transferring electrons from the species in the solution to the atoms on the
electrode across the electrode–solution interface. Because of this situation, e° values must
be used cautiously in predicting the actual order of oxidation or reduction of species in
an electrolytic cell.

17.8 Commercial Electrolytic Processes

Another change that took place as the wood decomposed was the formation of carbon dioxide. This shifted the
equilibrium that is present in the ocean,

Power
source
e–

e–

CO2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ HCO3 1aq2  H 1aq2


821



to the right, producing higher concentrations of HCO3 . In
turn, the HCO3  reacted with Ca 2 ions present in the seawater to form calcium carbonate:

Na+
OH –
H2O

Ca 2 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2 ∆ CaCO3 1s2  H 1aq2
Calcium carbonate is the main component of limestone.
Thus, over time, the corroded silver coins and bars became
encased in limestone.
Both the limestone formation and the corrosion had to
be dealt with. Since CaCO3 contains the basic anion CO3 2,
acid dissolves limestone:
2H 1aq2  CaCO3 1s2 ¡ Ca 2 1aq2  CO2 1g2  H2O1l2
Soaking the mass of coins in a buffered acidic bath for several hours allowed the individual pieces to be separated, and
the black Ag2S on the surfaces was revealed. An abrasive
could not be used to remove this corrosion; it would have destroyed the details of the engraving—a very valuable feature
of the coins to a historian or a collector—and it would have
washed away some of the silver. Instead, the corrosion reaction was reversed through electrolytic reduction. The coins
were connected to the cathode of an electrolytic cell in a dilute sodium hydroxide solution as represented in the ﬁgure.

17.8

Anode

Coin coated
with Ag2S
Cathode

As electrons ﬂow, the Ag ions in the silver sulﬁde are
reduced to silver metal:
Ag2S  2e ¡ Ag  S2
As a by-product, bubbles of hydrogen gas from the reduction of water form on the surface of the coins:
2H2O  2e ¡ H2 1g2  2OH
The agitation caused by the bubbles loosens the ﬂakes of
metal sulﬁde and helps clean the coins.
These procedures have made it possible to restore the
treasure to very nearly its condition when the Atocha sailed
many years ago.

Commercial Electrolytic Processes

The chemistry of metals is characterized by their ability to donate electrons to form ions.
Because metals are typically such good reducing agents, most are found in nature in ores,
mixtures of ionic compounds often containing oxide, sulﬁde, and silicate anions. The noble metals, such as gold, silver, and platinum, are more difﬁcult to oxidize and are often
found as pure metals.

Production of Aluminum
Aluminum is one of the most abundant elements on earth, ranking third behind oxygen
and silicon. Since aluminum is a very active metal, it is found in nature as its oxide in
an ore called bauxite (named after Les Baux, France, where it was discovered in 1821).
Production of aluminum metal from its ore proved to be more difﬁcult than production of most other metals. In 1782 Lavoisier recognized aluminum to be a metal
“whose afﬁnity for oxygen is so strong that it cannot be overcome by any known reducing agent.” As a result, pure aluminum metal remained unknown. Finally, in 1854

822

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
a process was found for producing metallic aluminum using sodium, but aluminum
remained a very expensive rarity. In fact, it is said that Napoleon III served his most
honored guests with aluminum forks and spoons, while the others had to settle for gold
and silver utensils.
The breakthrough came in 1886 when two men, Charles M. Hall in the United States
and Paul Heroult in France, almost simultaneously discovered a practical electrolytic
process for producing aluminum (see Fig. 17.21). The key factor in the Hall–Heroult
process is the use of molten cryolite (Na3AlF6) as the solvent for the aluminum oxide.
Electrolysis is possible only if ions can move to the electrodes. A common method
for producing ion mobility is dissolving the substance to be electrolyzed in water. This is
not possible in the case of aluminum because water is more easily reduced than Al3, as
the following standard reduction potentials show:
Al3  3e ¡ Al
2H2O  2e ¡ H2  2OH

FIGURE 17.21
Charles Martin Hall (1863–1914) was a student at Oberlin College in Ohio when he
ﬁrst became interested in aluminum. One
of his professors commented that anyone
who could manufacture aluminum cheaply
would make a fortune, and Hall decided to
give it a try. The 21-year-old Hall worked in
a wooden shed near his house with an iron
frying pan as a container, a blacksmith’s
forge as a heat source, and galvanic cells
constructed from fruit jars. Using these
crude galvanic cells, Hall found that he
could produce aluminum by passing a
current through a molten Al2O3/Na3AlF6
mixture. By a strange coincidence, Paul
Heroult, a Frenchman who was born and
died in the same years as Hall, made the
same discovery at about the same time.

e°  1.66 V
e°  0.83 V

Thus aluminum metal cannot be plated out of an aqueous solution of Al3.
Ion mobility also can be produced by melting the salt. But the melting point of solid
Al2O3 is much too high 12050°C2 to allow practical electrolysis of the molten oxide. A
mixture of Al2O3 and Na3AlF6, however, has a melting point of 1000°C, and the resulting molten mixture can be used to obtain aluminum metal electrolytically. Because of this
discovery by Hall and Heroult, the price of aluminum plunged (see Table 17.3), and its
use became economically feasible.
Bauxite is not pure aluminum oxide (called alumina); it also contains the oxides of
iron, silicon, and titanium, and various silicate materials. To obtain the pure hydrated alumina 1Al2O3  nH2O2, the crude bauxite is treated with aqueous sodium hydroxide. Being
amphoteric, alumina dissolves in the basic solution:
Al2O3 1s2  2OH 1aq2 ¡ 2AlO2 1aq2  H2O1l2
The other metal oxides, which are basic, remain as solids. The solution containing the
aluminate ion (AlO2 ) is separated from the sludge of the other oxides and is acidiﬁed
with carbon dioxide gas, causing the hydrated alumina to reprecipitate:
2CO2 1g2  2AlO2 1aq2  1n  12H2O1l2 ¡ 2HCO3 1aq2  Al2O3  nH2O1s2
The puriﬁed alumina is then mixed with cryolite and melted, and the aluminum ion is
reduced to aluminum metal in an electrolytic cell of the type shown in Fig. 17.22. Because
the electrolyte solution contains a large number of aluminum-containing ions, the chemistry
is not completely clear. However, the alumina probably reacts with the cryolite anion as
follows:
Al2O3  4AlF6 3 ¡ 3Al2OF6 2  6F 

TABLE 17.3

The Price of
Aluminum over the Past Century
Date

Price of Aluminum ($/lb)*

1855
1885
1890
1895
1970
1980
1990

100,000
100
2
0.50
0.30
0.80
0.74

*Note the precipitous drop in price after the
discovery of the Hall–Heroult process.

The electrode reactions are thought to be
Cathode reaction:
Anode reaction:

AlF63  3e ¡ Al  6F
2Al2OF62  12F  C ¡ 4AlF63  CO2  4e

The overall cell reaction can be written as
2Al2O3  3C ¡ 4Al  3CO2
The aluminum produced in this electrolytic process is 99.5% pure. To be useful as a
structural material, aluminum is alloyed with metals such as zinc (used for trailer and aircraft construction) and manganese (used for cooking utensils, storage tanks, and highway
signs). The production of aluminum consumes about 5% of all the electricity used in the
United States.

17.8 Commercial Electrolytic Processes

Electrodes of
graphite rods

To external
power source

Carbon dioxide
formed at
the anodes
Carbon-lined
iron tank

823

Molten
Al2O3 /Na3 AlF6
mixture
Molten
aluminum

Plug

FIGURE 17.22
A schematic diagram of an electrolytic cell for producing aluminum by the Hall–Heroult
process. Because molten aluminum is more dense than the mixture of molten cryolite and
alumina, it settles to the bottom of the cell and is drawn off periodically. The graphite electrodes are gradually eaten away and must be replaced from time to time. The cell operates
at a current ﬂow of up to 250,000 A.

Electroreﬁning of Metals
Puriﬁcation of metals is another important application of electrolysis. For example, impure copper from the chemical reduction of copper ore is cast into large slabs that serve
as the anodes for electrolytic cells. Aqueous copper sulfate is the electrolyte, and thin
sheets of ultrapure copper function as the cathodes (see Fig. 17.23).
The main reaction at the anode is
Cu ¡ Cu2  2e
Other metals such as iron and zinc are also oxidized from the impure anode:
Zn ¡ Zn2  2e
Fe ¡ Fe2  2e

FIGURE 17.23
Ultrapure copper sheets that serve as the
cathodes are lowered between slabs of impure copper that serve as the anodes into a
tank containing an aqueous solution of
copper sulfate (CuSO4 ). It takes about four
weeks for the anodes to dissolve and for
the pure copper to be deposited on the
cathodes.

824

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

e–

e–

Power
source

e–

e–

e–
Ag

Ag+
Ag+

Anode
(a)

e–
Ag

Cathode

(b)

FIGURE 17.24
(a) A silver-plated teapot. Silver plating is often used to beautify and protect cutlery and items of table service.
(b) Schematic of the electroplating of a spoon. The item to be plated is the cathode, and the anode is a silver bar.
Silver is plated out at the cathode: Ag   e  S Ag. Note that a salt bridge is not needed here because Ag  ions
are involved at both electrodes.

Noble metal impurities in the anode are not oxidized at the voltage used; they fall to the
bottom of the cell to form a sludge, which is processed to remove the valuable silver, gold,
and platinum.
The Cu2 ions from the solution are deposited onto the cathode
Cu2  2e ¡ Cu
producing copper that is 99.95% pure.

Metal Plating
Metals that readily corrode can often be protected by the application of a thin coating of
a metal that resists corrosion. Examples are “tin” cans, which are actually steel cans with
a thin coating of tin, and chrome-plated steel bumpers for automobiles.
An object can be plated by making it the cathode in a tank containing ions of the
plating metal. The silver plating of a spoon is shown schematically in Fig. 17.24(b). In
an actual plating process, the solution also contains ligands that form complexes with the
silver ion. By lowering the concentration of Ag in this way, a smooth, even coating of
silver is obtained.

Electrolysis of Sodium Chloride
Addition of a nonvolatile solute lowers the
melting point of the solvent, molten NaCl
in this case.

Sodium metal is mainly produced by the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride. Because
solid NaCl has a rather high melting point 1800°C2, it is usually mixed with solid CaCl2 to
lower the melting point to about 1600°C2 . The mixture is then electrolyzed in a Downs cell,
as illustrated in Fig. 17.25, where the reactions are
Anode reaction:
Cathode reaction:

2Cl ¡ Cl2  2e
Na  e ¡ Na

17.8 Commercial Electrolytic Processes

825

Cl2 gas

Liquid
sodium
metal
Molten mixture of
NaCl and CaCl2

Anode

Cathode

FIGURE 17.25
The Downs cell for the electrolysis of
molten sodium chloride. The cell is designed so that the sodium and chlorine
produced cannot come into contact with
each other to re-form NaCl.

Cathode

Iron
screen

Anode

Iron
screen

At the temperatures in the Downs cell, the sodium is liquid and is drained off, then cooled,
and cast into blocks. Because it is so reactive, sodium must be stored in an inert solvent,
such as mineral oil, to prevent its oxidation.
Electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride (brine) is an important industrial process for
the production of chlorine and sodium hydroxide. In fact, this process is the second largest
consumer of electricity in the United States, after the production of aluminum. Sodium is
not produced in this process under normal circumstances because H2O is more easily reduced than Na, as the standard reduction potentials show:
Na  e ¡ Na
2H2O  2e ¡ H2  2OH

e°  2.71 V
e°  0.83 V

Hydrogen, not sodium, is produced at the cathode.
For the reasons we discussed in Section 17.7, chlorine gas is produced at the anode.
Thus the electrolysis of brine produces hydrogen and chlorine:
Anode reaction:
Cathode reaction:

2Cl ¡ Cl2  2e
2H2O  2e ¡ H2  2OH

It leaves a solution containing dissolved NaOH and NaCl.
The contamination of the sodium hydroxide by NaCl can be virtually eliminated using
a special mercury cell for electrolyzing brine (see Fig. 17.26). In this cell, mercury is the
conductor at the cathode, and because hydrogen gas has an extremely high overvoltage
with a mercury electrode, Na is reduced instead of H2O. The resulting sodium metal dissolves in the mercury, forming a liquid alloy, which is then pumped to a chamber where
the dissolved sodium reacts with water to produce hydrogen:
2Na1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2Na 1aq2  2OH 1aq2  H2 1g2
Relatively pure solid NaOH can be recovered from the aqueous solution, and the regenerated mercury is then pumped back to the electrolysis cell. This process, called
the chlor–alkali process, was the main method for producing chlorine and sodium
hydroxide in the United States for many years. However, because of the environmental problems associated with the mercury cell, it has been largely displaced in the

826

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
H2 gas

NaOH solution

H2O
Hg

Hg/Na

Cl2 gas

FIGURE 17.26
The mercury cell for production of chlorine
and sodium hydroxide. The large overvoltage required to produce hydrogen at a mercury electrode means that Na ions are
reduced rather than water. The sodium
formed dissolves in the liquid mercury and
is pumped to a chamber where it reacts
with water.

Anode

Brine

Hg

Brine

Mercury cathode

Na in Hg(l)

chlor–alkali industry by other technologies. In the United States, nearly 75% of
the chlor–alkali production is now carried out in diaphragm cells. In a diaphragm cell
the cathode and anode are separated by a diaphragm that allows passage of H2O molecules, Na ions, and, to a limited extent, Cl ions. The diaphragm does not allow OH
ions to pass through it. Thus the H2 and OH formed at the cathode are kept separate
from the Cl2 formed at the anode. The major disadvantage of this process is that the
aqueous efﬂuent pumped from the cathode compartment contains a mixture of sodium
hydroxide and unreacted sodium chloride, which must be separated if pure sodium
hydroxide is a desired product.
In the past 30 years, a new process has been developed in the chlor–alkali industry
that employs a membrane to separate the anode and cathode compartments in brine electrolysis cells. The membrane is superior to a diaphragm because the membrane is impermeable to anions. Only cations can ﬂow through the membrane. Because neither Cl nor
OH ions can pass through the membrane separating the anode and cathode compartments, NaCl contamination of the NaOH formed at the cathode does not occur. Although
membrane technology is now just becoming prominent in the United States, it is the
dominant method for chlor–alkali production in Japan.

Key Terms

For Review

electrochemistry

Section 17.1
oxidation–reduction (redox) reaction
reducing agent
oxidizing agent
oxidation
reduction
half-reactions
salt bridge
porous disk
galvanic cell
anode
cathode

Electrochemistry
䊉 The study of the interchange of chemical and electrical energy
䊉 Employs oxidation–reduction reactions
䊉 Galvanic cell: chemical energy is transformed into electrical energy by separating
the oxidizing and reducing agents and forcing the electrons to travel through a
wire
䊉 Electrolytic cell: electrical energy is used to produce a chemical change
Galvanic cell
䊉 Anode: the electrode where oxidation occurs
䊉 Cathode: the electrode where reduction occurs

For Review
cell potential (electromotive force)
volt
voltmeter
potentiometer

䊉

Section 17.2

faraday

Section 17.4

Free energy and work
The maximum work that a cell can perform is

䊉

wmax  qemax

Section 17.5
battery
lead storage battery
dry cell battery
fuel cell

䊉

䊉

Section 17.6
corrosion
galvanizing
cathodic protection

Section 17.8
Downs cell
mercury cell
chlor–alkali process

where emax represents the cell potential when no current is ﬂowing
The actual work obtained from a cell is always less than the maximum because
energy is lost through frictional heating of the wire when current ﬂows
For a process carried out at constant temperature and pressure, the change in free
energy equals the maximum useful work obtainable from that process:
¢G  wmax  qemax  nFe
where F (faraday) equals 96,485 C and n is the number of moles of electrons
transferred in the process

Section 17.7
electrolytic cell
electrolysis
ampere

work 1J2
w

q
charge 1C2

• A system of half-reactions, called standard reduction potentials, can be used to
calculate the potentials of various cells
• The half-reaction 2H  2e ¡ H2 is arbitrarily assigned a potential of 0 V

Section 17.3

concentration cell
Nernst equation
glass electrode
ion-selective electrode

The driving force behind the electron transfer is called the cell potential (ecell)
• The potential is measured in units of volts (V), deﬁned as a joule of work
per coulomb of charge:
e1V2 

standard hydrogen electrode
standard reduction potentials

827

Concentration cell
䊉 A galvanic cell in which both compartments have the same components but at
different concentrations
䊉 The electrons ﬂow in the direction that tends to equalize the concentrations
Nernst equation
䊉 Shows how the cell potential depends on the concentrations of the cell components:
e  e0 
䊉

0.0591
log Q
n

at 25°C

When a galvanic cell is at equilibrium, e  0 and Q  K

Batteries
A battery consists of a galvanic cell or group of cells connected in series that
serve as a source of direct current
䊉 Lead storage battery
• Anode: lead
• Cathode: lead coated with PbO2
• Electrolyte: H2SO4(aq)
䊉 Dry cell battery
• Contains a moist paste instead of a liquid electrolyte
• Anode: usually Zn
• Cathode: carbon rod in contact with an oxidizing agent (which varies depending on the application)
䊉

Fuel cells
䊉 Galvanic cells in which the reactants are continuously supplied
䊉 The H2/O2 fuel cell is based on the reaction between H2 and O2 to form water
Corrosion
䊉 Involves the oxidation of metals to form mainly oxides and sulﬁdes

828

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

䊉

䊉

Some metals, such as aluminum and chromium, form a thin protective oxide coating that prevents further corrosion
The corrosion of iron to form rust is an electrochemical process
• The Fe2 ions formed at anodic areas of the surface migrate through the moisture layer to cathodic regions, where they react with oxygen from the air
• Iron can be protected from corrosion by coating it with paint or with a thin layer
of metal such as chromium, tin, or zinc; by alloying; and by cathodic protection

Electrolysis
䊉 Used to place a thin coating of metal onto steel
䊉 Used to produce pure metals such as aluminum and copper

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is electrochemistry? What are redox reactions? Explain the difference
between a galvanic and an electrolytic cell.
2. Galvanic cells harness spontaneous oxidation–reduction reactions to produce
work by producing a current. They do so by controlling the ﬂow of electrons
from the species oxidized to the species reduced. How is a galvanic cell designed? What is in the cathode compartment? The anode compartment? What
purpose do electrodes serve? Which way do electrons always ﬂow in the wire
connecting the two electrodes in a galvanic cell? Why is it necessary to use a
salt bridge or a porous disk in a galvanic cell? Which way do cations ﬂow in
the salt bridge? Which way do the anions ﬂow? What is a cell potential and
what is a volt?
3. Table 17.1 lists common half-reactions along with the standard reduction potential associated with each half-reaction. These standard reduction potentials are
all relative to some standard. What is the standard (zero point)? If e° is positive
for a half-reaction, what does it mean? If e° is negative for a half-reaction,
what does it mean? Which species in Table 17.1 is most easily reduced? Least
easily reduced? The reverse of the half-reactions in Table 17.1 are the oxidation half-reactions. How are standard oxidation potentials determined? In Table
17.1, which species is the best reducing agent? The worst reducing agent?
To determine the standard cell potential for a redox reaction, the standard
reduction potential is added to the standard oxidation potential. What must be
true about this sum if the cell is to be spontaneous (produce a galvanic cell)?
Standard reduction and oxidation potentials are intensive. What does this mean?
Summarize how line notation is used to describe galvanic cells.
4. Consider the equation ¢G°  nFe°. What are the four terms in this equation?
Why does a minus sign appear in the equation? What does the superscript °
indicate?
5. The Nernst equation allows determination of the cell potential for a galvanic
cell at nonstandard conditions. Write out the Nernst equation. What are nonstandard conditions? What do e, e°, n, and Q stand for in the Nernst equation?
What does the Nernst equation reduce to when a redox reaction is at equilibrium? What are the signs of ¢G° and e° when K 6 1? When K 7 1? When
K  1? Explain the following statement: e determines spontaneity, while e°
determines the equilibrium position. Under what conditions can you use e° to
predict spontaneity?
6. What are concentration cells? What is e° in a concentration cell? What is the
driving force for a concentration cell to produce a voltage? Is the higher or the
lower ion concentration solution present at the anode? When the anode ion concentration is decreased and/or the cathode ion concentration is increased, both

Active Learning Questions

7.

8.

9.

10.

829

give rise to larger cell potentials. Why? Concentration cells are commonly used
to calculate the value of equilibrium constants for various reactions. For example, the silver concentration cell illustrated in Fig. 17.9 can be used to determine
the Ksp value for AgCl(s). To do so, NaCl is added to the anode compartment
until no more precipitate forms. The [Cl  ] in solution is then determined somehow. What happens to ecell when NaCl is added to the anode compartment? To
calculate the Ksp value, [Ag] must be calculated. Given the value of ecell, how
is [Ag] determined at the anode?
Batteries are galvanic cells. What happens to ecell as a battery discharges? Does
a battery represent a system at equilibrium? Explain. What is ecell when a battery reaches equilibrium? How are batteries and fuel cells alike? How are they
different? The U.S. space program utilizes hydrogen–oxygen fuel cells to produce power for its spacecraft. What is a hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell?
Not all spontaneous redox reactions produce wonderful results. Corrosion is an
example of a spontaneous redox process that has negative effects. What happens in the corrosion of a metal such as iron? What must be present for the corrosion of iron to take place? How can moisture and salt increase the severity of
corrosion? Explain how the following protect metals from corrosion:
a. paint
b. durable oxide coatings
c. galvanizing
d. sacriﬁcial metal
e. alloying
f. cathodic protection
What characterizes an electrolytic cell? What is an ampere? When the current
applied to an electrolytic cell is multiplied by the time in seconds, what quantity is determined? How is this quantity converted to moles of electrons
required? How are moles of electrons required converted to moles of metal
plated out? What does plating mean? How do you predict the cathode and the
anode half-reactions in an electrolytic cell? Why is the electrolysis of molten
salts much easier to predict in terms of what occurs at the anode and cathode
than the electrolysis of aqueous dissolved salts? What is overvoltage?
Electrolysis has many important industrial applications. What are some of these
applications? The electrolysis of molten NaCl is the major process by which
sodium metal is produced. However, the electrolysis of aqueous NaCl does not
produce sodium metal under normal circumstances. Why? What is puriﬁcation
of a metal by electrolysis?

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. Sketch a galvanic cell, and explain how it works. Look at Figs. 17.1
and 17.2. Explain what is occurring in each container and why the
cell in Fig. 17.2 “works” but the one in Fig. 17.1 does not.
2. In making a speciﬁc galvanic cell, explain how one decides on
the electrodes and the solutions to use in the cell.

3. You want to “plate out” nickel metal from a nickel nitrate solution onto a piece of metal inserted into the solution. Should you
use copper or zinc? Explain.
4. A copper penny can be dissolved in nitric acid but not in hydrochloric acid. Using reduction potentials from the book, show
why this is so. What are the products of the reaction? Newer
pennies contain a mixture of zinc and copper. What happens to
the zinc in the penny when the coin is placed in nitric acid? Hydrochloric acid? Support your explanations with data from the
book, and include balanced equations for all reactions.
5. Sketch a cell that forms iron metal from iron(II) while changing
chromium metal to chromium(III). Calculate the voltage, show

830

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
the electron ﬂow, label the anode and cathode, and balance the
overall cell equation.
Which of the following is the best reducing agent: F2, H2, Na,
Na, F ? Explain. Order as many of these species as possible
from the best to the worst oxidizing agent. Why can’t you order
all of them? From Table 17.1 choose the species that is the best
oxidizing agent. Choose the best reducing agent. Explain.
You are told that metal A is a better reducing agent than metal B.
What, if anything, can be said about A and B? Explain.
Explain the following relationships: ¢G and w, cell potential
and w, cell potential and ¢G, cell potential and Q. Using these
relationships, explain how you could make a cell in which both
electrodes are the same metal and both solutions contain the same
compound, but at different concentrations. Why does such a cell
run spontaneously?
Explain why cell potentials are not multiplied by the coefﬁcients
in the balanced redox equation. (Use the relationship between
¢G and cell potential to do this.)
What is the difference between e and e°? When is e equal to
zero? When is e° equal to zero? (Consider “regular” galvanic
cells as well as concentration cells.)
Consider the following galvanic cell:

Zn

Ag

1.0 M Zn2+

1.0 M Ag+

What happens to e as the concentration of Zn 2 is increased?
As the concentration of Ag is increased? What happens to e°
in these cases?
12. Look up the reduction potential for Fe3 to Fe 2. Look up the
reduction potential for Fe 2 to Fe. Finally, look up the reduction potential for Fe3 to Fe. You should notice that adding the
reduction potentials for the ﬁrst two does not give the potential
for the third. Why not? Show how you can use the ﬁrst two potentials to calculate the third potential.
A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Review of Oxidation–Reduction
Reactions
If you have trouble with these exercises, you should review Sections 4.9 and
4.10.

13. Deﬁne oxidation and reduction in terms of both change in oxidation number and electron loss or gain.
14. Assign oxidation numbers to all the atoms in each of the following.

a. HNO3
e. C6H12O6
i. Na2C2O4
b. CuCl2
f. Ag
j. CO2
c. O2
g. PbSO4
k. (NH4)2Ce(SO4)3
d. H2O2
h. PbO2
l. Cr2O3
15. Specify which of the following equations represent oxidation–
reduction reactions, and indicate the oxidizing agent, the reducing
agent, the species being oxidized, and the species being reduced.
a. CH4 1g2  H2O1g2 S CO1g2  3H2 1g2
b. 2AgNO3 1aq2  Cu1s2 S Cu1NO3 2 2 1aq2  2Ag1s2
c. Zn1s2  2HCl1aq2 S ZnCl2 1aq2  H2 1g2
d. 2H  1aq2  2CrO4 2 1aq2 S Cr2O7 2 1aq2  H2O1l2
16. Balance each of the following equations by the half-reaction
method for the pH conditions speciﬁed.
a. Cr1s2  NO3  1aq2 S Cr 3 1aq2  NO1g2 1acidic2
b. Al1s2  MnO4  1aq2 S Al 3 1aq2  Mn 2 1aq2 1acidic2
c. CH3OH1aq2  Ce 4 1aq2 S CO2 1aq2  Ce 3 1aq2 1acidic2
d. PO3 3 1aq2  MnO4  1aq2 S
PO4 3 1aq2  MnO2 1s2 1basic2
e. Mg1s2  OCl  1aq2 S Mg1OH2 2 1s2  Cl  1aq2 1basic2
f. H2CO1aq2  Ag1NH3 2 2 1aq2 S
HCO3  1aq2  Ag1s2  NH3 1aq2 1basic2

Questions
17. When magnesium metal is added to a beaker of HCl(aq), a gas
is produced. Knowing that magnesium is oxidized and that hydrogen is reduced, write the balanced equation for the reaction.
How many electrons are transferred in the balanced equation?
What quantity of useful work can be obtained when Mg is added
directly to the beaker of HCl? How can you harness this reaction to do useful work?
18. How can one construct a galvanic cell from two substances, each
having a negative standard reduction potential?
19. The free energy change for a reaction, G, is an extensive property.
What is an extensive property? Surprisingly, one can calculate G
from the cell potential, e, for the reaction. This is surprising
because e is an intensive property. How can the extensive property
G be calculated from the intensive property e?
20. What is wrong with the following statement: The best concentration cell will consist of the substance having the most positive standard reduction potential. What drives a concentration
cell to produce a large voltage?
21. When jump-starting a car with a dead battery, the ground jumper
should be attached to a remote part of the engine block. Why?
22. In theory, most metals should easily corrode in air. Why? A group
of metals called the noble metals are relatively difﬁcult to corrode
in air. Some noble metals include: gold, platinum, and silver.
Reference Table 17.1 to come up with a possible reason why the
noble metals are relatively difﬁcult to corrode.
23. Consider the electrolysis of a molten salt of some metal. What
information must you know to calculate the mass of metal plated
out in the electrolytic cell?
24. Although aluminum is one of the most abundant elements on
earth, production of pure Al proved very difﬁcult until the late
1800s. At this time, the Hall–Heroult process made it relatively
easy to produce pure Al. Why was pure Al so difﬁcult to produce
and what was the key discovery behind the Hall–Heroult process?

Exercises

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Galvanic Cells, Cell Potentials, Standard Reduction
Potentials, and Free Energy
25. Sketch the galvanic cells based on the following overall reactions.
Show the direction of electron ﬂow and identify the cathode and
anode. Give the overall balanced reaction. Assume that all concentrations are 1.0 M and that all partial pressures are 1.0 atm.
a. Cr 3 1aq2  Cl2 1g2 ∆ Cr2O7 2 1aq2  Cl  1aq2
b. Cu 2 1aq2  Mg1s2 ∆ Mg 2 1aq2  Cu1s2
26. Sketch the galvanic cells based on the following overall reactions. Show the direction of electron ﬂow, the direction of ion
migration through the salt bridge, and identify the cathode and
anode. Give the overall balanced reaction. Assume that all concentrations are 1.0 M and that all partial pressures are 1.0 atm.
a. IO3 1aq2  Fe2 1aq2 ∆ Fe3 1aq2  I2 1aq2
b. Zn1s2  Ag 1aq2 ∆ Zn2 1aq2  Ag1s2
27. Calculate e° values for the galvanic cells in Exercise 25.
28. Calculate e° values for the galvanic cells in Exercise 26.
29. Sketch the galvanic cells based on the following half-reactions.
Show the direction of electron ﬂow, show the direction of ion
migration through the salt bridge, and identify the cathode and
anode. Give the overall balanced reaction, and determine e° for
the galvanic cells. Assume that all concentrations are 1.0 M and
that all partial pressures are 1.0 atm.
a. Cl2  2e  S 2Cl 
e°  1.36 V
e°  1.09 V
Br2  2e  S 2Br
b. MnO4   8H   5e  S Mn 2  4H2O
e°  1.51 V
IO4   2H   2e  S IO3   H2O
e°  1.60 V
30. Sketch the galvanic cells based on the following half-reactions.
Show the direction of electron ﬂow, show the direction of ion
migration through the salt bridge, and identify the cathode and
anode. Give the overall balanced reaction, and determine e° for
the galvanic cells. Assume that all concentrations are 1.0 M and
that all partial pressures are 1.0 atm.
a. H2O2  2H   2e  S 2H2O
e°  1.78 V
O2  2H   2e  S H2O2
e°  0.68 V
b. Mn 2  2e  S Mn
e°  1.18 V
Fe 3  3e  S Fe
e°  0.036 V
31. Give the standard line notation for each cell in Exercises 25 and 29.
32. Give the standard line notation for each cell in Exercises 26 and 30.
33. Consider the following galvanic cells:

Au

Pt

Cd

Pt

For each galvanic cell, give the balanced cell reaction and determine e°. Standard reduction potentials are found in Table 17.1.
34. Give the balanced cell reaction and determine e° for the galvanic cells based on the following half-reactions. Standard reduction potentials are found in Table 17.1.
a. Cr2O7 2  14H   6e  S 2Cr 3  7H2O
H2O2  2H   2e  S 2H2O
b. 2H  2e  S H2
Al 3  3e  S Al
35. Calculate e° values for the following cells. Which reactions
are spontaneous as written (under standard conditions)? Balance the reactions. Standard reduction potentials are found in
Table 17.1.
a. MnO4  1aq2  I 1aq2 ∆ I2 1aq2  Mn 2 1aq2
b. MnO4  1aq2  F  1aq2 ∆ F2 1g2  Mn 2 1aq2
36. Calculate e° values for the following cells. Which reactions are
spontaneous as written (under standard conditions)? Balance the
reactions that are not already balanced. Standard reduction potentials are found in Table 17.1.
a. H2 1g2 ∆ H  1aq2  H  1aq2
b. Au 3 1aq2  Ag1s2 ∆ Ag  1aq2  Au1s2
37. Chlorine dioxide (ClO2), which is produced by the reaction
2NaClO2 1aq2  Cl2 1g2 ¡ 2ClO2 1g2  2NaCl1aq2

has been tested as a disinfectant for municipal water treatment.
Using data from Table 17.1, calculate e° and ¢G° at 25°C for
the production of ClO2.
38. The amount of manganese in steel is determined by changing it
to permanganate ion. The steel is ﬁrst dissolved in nitric acid,
producing Mn 2 ions. These ions are then oxidized to the deeply
colored MnO4  ions by periodate ion (IO4 ) in acid solution.
a. Complete and balance an equation describing each of the
above reactions.
b. Calculate e° and ¢G° at 25°C for each reaction.
39. Calculate the maximum amount of
from the galvanic cells at standard
40. Calculate the maximum amount of
from the galvanic cells at standard

1.0 M Au3+

(a)

1.0 M Cd2+

(b)

1.0 M VO2+
1.0 M H+
1.0 M VO2+

work that can be obtained
conditions in Exercise 33.
work that can be obtained
conditions in Exercise 34.

41. Calculate e° for the reaction

CH3OH1l2  32 O2 1g2 ¡ CO2 1g2  2H2O1l2

using values of ¢G°f in Appendix 4.
42. The equation ¢G°  nF e° also can be applied to halfreactions. Use standard reduction potentials to estimate ¢G°f for
Fe 2(aq) and Fe3(aq). (¢G°f for e  0.)
43. Using data from Table 17.1, place the following in order of
increasing strength as oxidizing agents (all under standard conditions).
Cd 2, IO3 ,

1.0 M Cu+
1.0 M Cu2+

831

K, H2O,

AuCl4 , I2

44. Using data from Table 17.1, place the following in order of
increasing strength as reducing agents (all under standard conditions).
Cu , F ,

H ,

H2O, I2, K

832

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

45. Answer the following questions using data from Table 17.1 (all
under standard conditions).
a. Is H(aq) capable of oxidizing Cu(s) to Cu 2(aq)?
b. Is Fe3(aq) capable of oxidizing I(aq)?
c. Is H2(g) capable of reducing Ag(aq)?
d. Is Fe 2(aq) capable of reducing Cr3(aq) to Cr2(aq)?
46. Consider only the species (at standard conditions)
Na, Cl , Ag ,

Ag, Zn 2,

Zn, Pb

in answering the following questions. Give reasons for your
answers. (Use data from Table 17.1.)
a. Which is the strongest oxidizing agent?
b. Which is the strongest reducing agent?
c. Which species can be oxidized by SO4 2(aq) in acid?
d. Which species can be reduced by Al(s)?
47. Use the table of standard reduction potentials (Table 17.1) to
pick a reagent that is capable of each of the following oxidations
(under standard conditions in acidic solution).
a. Oxidize Br to Br2 but not oxidize Cl  to Cl2
b. Oxidize Mn to Mn 2 but not oxidize Ni to Ni 2
48. Use the table of standard reduction potentials (Table 17.1) to
pick a reagent that is capable of each of the following reductions
(under standard conditions in acidic solution).
a. Reduce Cu 2 to Cu but not reduce Cu 2 to Cu.
b. Reduce Br2 to Br but not reduce I2 to I.
49. Hydrazine is somewhat toxic. Use the half-reactions shown below to explain why household bleach (a highly alkaline solution
of sodium hypochlorite) should not be mixed with household
ammonia or glass cleansers that contain ammonia.
ClO  H2O  2e  ¡ 2OH  Cl 
N2H4  2H2O  2e  ¡ 2NH3  2OH

e°  0.90 V
e°  0.10 V

50. The compound with the formula TlI3 is a black solid. Given the
following standard reduction potentials,
Tl 3  2e  ¡ Tl

e°  1.25 V

I3   2e  ¡ 3I

e°  0.55 V

would you formulate this compound as thallium(III) iodide or
thallium(I) triiodide?

The Nernst Equation
51. A galvanic cell is based on the following half-reactions at 25°C:
Ag   e  ¡ Ag
H2O2  2H   2e  ¡ 2H2O
Predict whether ecell is larger or smaller than e°cell for the following cases.
a. [Ag  ]  1.0 M, [ H2O2 ]  2.0 M, [ H  ]  2.0 M
b. [Ag  ]  2.0 M, [ H2O2 ]  1.0 M, [ H  ]  1.0  107 M
52. Consider the concentration cell in Fig. 17.10. If the Fe 2 concentration in the right compartment is changed from 0.1 M to
1  107 M Fe 2, predict the direction of electron ﬂow, and designate the anode and cathode compartments.

53. Consider the concentration cell shown below. Calculate the cell
potential at 25°C when the concentration of Ag in the compartment on the right is the following.
a. 1.0 M
b. 2.0 M
c. 0.10 M
d. 4.0  105 M
e. Calculate the potential when both solutions are 0.10 M in Ag.
For each case, also identify the cathode, the anode, and the direction in which electrons ﬂow.

Ag

Ag

[Ag+] = 1.0 M

54. Consider a concentration cell similar to the one shown in Exercise 53, except that both electrodes are made of Ni and in the
left-hand compartment [Ni 2 ]  1.0 M. Calculate the cell potential at 25°C when the concentration of Ni 2 in the compartment on the right has each of the following values.
a. 1.0 M
b. 2.0 M
c. 0.10 M
d. 4.0  105 M
e. Calculate the potential when both solutions are 2.5 M in Ni 2.
For each case, also identify the cathode, anode, and the direction in which electrons ﬂow.
55. The overall reaction in the lead storage battery is
Pb1s2  PbO2 1s2  2H  1aq2  2HSO4  1aq2 ¡
2PbSO4 1s2  2H2O1l2
Calculate e at 25°C for this battery when [H2SO4 ]  4.5 M,
that is, [H  ]  [HSO4  ]  4.5 M. At 25°C, e°  2.04 V for
the lead storage battery.
56. Calculate the pH of the cathode compartment for the following reaction given ecell  3.01 V when [Cr 3 ]  0.15 M,
[Al 3 ]  0.30 M, and [Cr2O7 2 ]  0.55 M.
2Al1s2  Cr2O7 2 1aq2  14H  1aq2 S
2Al 3 1aq2  2Cr 3 1aq2  7H2O1l2

57. Consider the cell described below:
Zn 0 Zn 2 11.00 M2 0 0Cu 2 11.00 M2 0 Cu
Calculate the cell potential after the reaction has operated
long enough for the [Zn 2 ] to have changed by 0.20 mol/L.
(Assume T  25°C.)
58. Consider the cell described below:
Al 0 Al 3 11.00 M2 0 0 Pb 2 11.00 M2 0 Pb

833

Exercises
Calculate the cell potential after the reaction has operated
long enough for the [Al3] to have changed by 0.60 mol/L.
(Assume T  25°C.)
59. An electrochemical cell consists of a standard hydrogen electrode and a copper metal electrode.
a. What is the potential of the cell at 25°C if the copper electrode
is placed in a solution in which [Cu 2 ]  2.5  104 M?
b. The copper electrode is placed in a solution of unknown
[Cu 2 ] . The measured potential at 25°C is 0.195 V. What is
[Cu 2 ] ? (Assume Cu 2 is reduced.)
60. An electrochemical cell consists of a nickel metal electrode immersed in a solution with 3 Ni 2 4  1.0 M separated by a porous
disk from an aluminum metal electrode.
a. What is the potential of this cell at 25°C if the aluminum
electrode is placed in a solution in which [Al 3 ]  7.2 
103 M?
b. When the aluminum electrode is placed in a certain solution
in which [Al3] is unknown, the measured cell potential at
25°C is 1.62 V. Calculate [Al3] in the unknown solution.
(Assume Al is oxidized.)
61. An electrochemical cell consists of a standard hydrogen electrode and a copper metal electrode. If the copper electrode is
placed in a solution of 0.10 M NaOH that is saturated with
Cu(OH)2, what is the cell potential at 25°C? (For Cu(OH)2,
Ksp  1.6  1019.)
62. An electrochemical cell consists of a nickel metal electrode immersed in a solution with [Ni 2 ]  1.0 M separated by a porous
disk from an aluminum metal electrode immersed in a solution
with [Al 3 ]  1.0 M . Sodium hydroxide is added to the aluminum compartment, causing Al(OH)3(s) to precipitate. After
precipitation of Al(OH)3 has ceased, the concentration of OH
is 1.0  104 M and the measured cell potential is 1.82 V. Calculate the Ksp value for Al(OH)3.
Al1OH2 3 1s2 ∆ Al 3 1aq2  3OH 1aq2

Ksp  ?

63. Consider a concentration cell that has both electrodes made of
some metal M. Solution A in one compartment of the cell contains 1.0 M M2. Solution B in the other cell compartment has
a volume of 1.00 L. At the beginning of the experiment 0.0100
mol of M(NO3)2 and 0.0100 mol of Na2SO4 are dissolved in solution B (ignore volume changes), where the reaction
M 2 1aq2  SO4 2 1aq2 ∆ MSO4 1s2
occurs. For this reaction equilibrium is rapidly established,
whereupon the cell potential is found to be 0.44 V at 25°C.
Assume that the process
M 2  2e  ¡ M
has a standard reduction potential of 0.31 V and that no other
redox process occurs in the cell. Calculate the value of Ksp for
MSO4(s) at 25°C.
64. You have a concentration cell in which the cathode has a silver
electrode with 0.10 M Ag. The anode also has a silver electrode
with Ag(aq), 0.050 M S2O3 2, and 1.0  10 3 M Ag(S2O3 ) 2 3.
You read the voltage to be 0.76 V.

a. Calculate the concentration of Ag at the cathode.
b. Determine the value of the equilibrium constant for the formation of Ag(S2O3 ) 2 3.
Ag  1aq2  2S2O3 2 1aq2 ∆ Ag1S2O3 2 2 3 1aq2

K?

65. Calculate ¢G° and K at 25°C for the reactions in Exercises 25
and 29.
66. Calculate ¢G° and K at 25°C for the reactions in Exercises 26
and 30.
67. An excess of ﬁnely divided iron is stirred up with a solution
that contains Cu2 ion, and the system is allowed to come to
equilibrium. The solid materials are then ﬁltered off, and
electrodes of solid copper and solid iron are inserted into the
remaining solution. What is the value of the ratio [Fe 2 ] [Cu 2 ]
at 25°C?
68. Consider the following reaction:
Ni 2 1aq2  Sn1s2 S Ni1s2  Sn 2 1aq2
Determine the minimum ratio of [Sn 2 ] [Ni 2 ] necessary to
make this reaction spontaneous as written.
69. Under standard conditions, what reaction occurs, if any, when
each of the following operations is performed?
a. Crystals of I2 are added to a solution of NaCl.
b. Cl2 gas is bubbled into a solution of NaI.
c. A silver wire is placed in a solution of CuCl2.
d. An acidic solution of FeSO4 is exposed to air.
For the reactions that occur, write a balanced equation and calculate e°, ¢G°, and K at 25°C.
70. A disproportionation reaction involves a substance that acts as
both an oxidizing and a reducing agent, producing higher and
lower oxidation states of the same element in the products.
Which of the following disproportionation reactions are spontaneous under standard conditions? Calculate ¢G° and K at
25°C for those reactions that are spontaneous under standard
conditions.
a. 2Cu 1aq2 S Cu 2 1aq2  Cu1s2
b. 3Fe 2 1aq2 S 2Fe 3 1aq2  Fe1s2
c. HClO2 1aq2 S ClO3  1aq2  HClO1aq2 1unbalanced2
Use the half-reactions:
ClO3   3H   2e  ¡ HClO2  H2O


HClO2  2H  2e



¡ HClO  H2O

e°  1.21 V
e°  1.65 V

71. Consider the galvanic cell based on the following half-reactions:
Au 3  3e  ¡ Au
Tl  e  ¡ Tl

e°  1.50 V
e°  0.34 V

a. Determine the overall cell reaction and calculate e°cell.
b. Calculate ¢G° and K for the cell reaction at 25°C.
c. Calculate ecell at 25°C when [Au 3 ]  1.0  102 M and
[Tl ]  1.0  104 M .
72. Consider the following galvanic cell at 25°C:
Pt 0 Cr 2 10.30 M2, Cr 3 12.0 M2 0 0 Co 2 10.20 M2 0 Co

834

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry
The overall reaction and equilibrium constant value are
2Cr 2 1aq2  Co 2 1aq2 ¡
2Cr 3 1aq2  Co1s2

K  2.79  107

Calculate the cell potential, e, for this galvanic cell and ¢G for
the cell reaction at these conditions.
73. Calculate Ksp for iron(II) sulﬁde given the following data:
FeS1s2  2e  S Fe1s2  S 2 1aq2

Fe 2 1aq2  2e  S Fe1s2

e°  1.01 V
e°  0.44 V

74. For the following half-reaction, e°  2.07 V:
AlF6 3  3e  ¡ Al  6F 
Using data from Table 17.1, calculate the equilibrium constant
at 25°C for the reaction
Al 3 1aq2  6F  1aq2 ∆ AlF6 3 1aq2

K?

75. Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant for the reaction
of zinc metal in a solution of silver nitrate at 25°C.
76. The solubility product for CuI(s) is 1.1  1012. Calculate the
value of e° for the half-reaction
CuI  e  ¡ Cu  I

Electrolysis
77. How long will it take to plate out each of the following with a
current of 100.0 A?
a. 1.0 kg Al from aqueous Al3
b. 1.0 g Ni from aqueous Ni 2
c. 5.0 mol Ag from aqueous Ag
78. The electrolysis of BiO produces pure bismuth. How long
would it take to produce 10.0 g of Bi by the electrolysis of a
BiO solution using a current of 25.0 A?
79. What mass of each of the following substances can be produced
in 1.0 h with a current of 15 A?
a. Co from aqueous Co 2
c. I2 from aqueous KI
b. Hf from aqueous Hf 4
d. Cr from molten CrO3
80. Aluminum is produced commercially by the electrolysis of Al2O3
in the presence of a molten salt. If a plant has a continuous capacity of 1.00 million amp, what mass of aluminum can be produced in 2.00 h?
81. An unknown metal M is electrolyzed. It took 74.1 s for a current of 2.00 amp to plate out 0.107 g of the metal from a solution containing M(NO3)3. Identify the metal.
82. Electrolysis of an alkaline earth metal chloride using a current
of 5.00 A for 748 s deposits 0.471 g of metal at the cathode.
What is the identity of the alkaline earth metal chloride?
83. What volume of F2 gas, at 25°C and 1.00 atm, is produced when
molten KF is electrolyzed by a current of 10.0 A for 2.00 h?
What mass of potassium metal is produced? At which electrode
does each reaction occur?
84. What volumes of H2(g) and O2(g) at STP are produced from the
electrolysis of water by a current of 2.50 A in 15.0 min?

85. One of the few industrial-scale processes that produce organic
compounds electrochemically is used by the Monsanto Company
to produce 1,4-dicyanobutane. The reduction reaction is
2CH2 “CHCN  2H   2e  ¡ NC¬1CH2 2 4¬CN
The NC¬(CH2 ) 4¬CN is then chemically reduced using hydrogen gas to H2N¬1CH2 2 6¬NH2, which is used in the production of nylon. What current must be used to produce 150. kg
of NC¬(CH2 ) 4¬CN per hour?
86. A single Hall–Heroult cell (as shown in Fig. 17.22) produces
about 1 ton of aluminum in 24 hours. What current must be used
to accomplish this?
87. It took 2.30 min using a current of 2.00 A to plate out all the silver from 0.250 L of a solution containing Ag. What was the
original concentration of Ag in the solution?
88. A solution containing Pt4 is electrolyzed with a current of
4.00 A. How long will it take to plate out 99% of the platinum
in 0.50 L of a 0.010 M solution of Pt4?
89. A solution at 25°C contains 1.0 M Cd 2, 1.0 M Ag, 1.0 M Au3,
and 1.0 M Ni 2 in the cathode compartment of an electrolytic
cell. Predict the order in which the metals will plate out as the
voltage is gradually increased.
90. Consider the following half-reactions:
IrCl6 3  3e  ¡ Ir  6Cl 
PtCl4

2

 2e



¡ Pt  4Cl



PdCl4 2  2e  ¡ Pd  4Cl 

e°  0.77 V
e°  0.73 V
e°  0.62 V

A hydrochloric acid solution contains platinum, palladium, and
iridium as chloro-complex ions. The solution is a constant 1.0 M
in chloride ion and 0.020 M in each complex ion. Is it feasible
to separate the three metals from this solution by electrolysis?
(Assume that 99% of a metal must be plated out before another
metal begins to plate out.)
91. What reactions take place at the cathode and the anode when
each of the following is electrolyzed?
a. molten NiBr2
b. molten AlF3
c. molten MnI2
92. What reactions take place at the cathode and the anode when
each of the following is electrolyzed? (Assume standard conditions.)
a. 1.0 M NiBr2 solution
b. 1.0 M AlF3 solution
c. 1.0 M MnI2 solution

Additional Exercises
93. The saturated calomel electrode, abbreviated SCE, is often used
as a reference electrode in making electrochemical measurements. The SCE is composed of mercury in contact with a saturated solution of calomel (Hg2Cl2). The electrolyte solution is
saturated KCl. eSCE is 0.242 V relative to the standard hydrogen electrode. Calculate the potential for each of the following
galvanic cells containing a saturated calomel electrode and the
given half-cell components at standard conditions. In each case,
indicate whether the SCE is the cathode or the anode. Standard
reduction potentials are found in Table 17.1.

Additional Exercises
a. Cu 2  2e  ¡ Cu
b. Fe 3  e  ¡ Fe 2
c. AgCl  e  ¡ Ag  Cl 
d. Al 3  3e  ¡ Al
e. Ni 2  2e  ¡ Ni
94. Consider the following half-reactions:

99.

Pt 2  2e  ¡ Pt

e°  1.188 V

PtCl4 2  2e  ¡ Pt  4Cl 
NO3   4H   3e  ¡ NO  2H2O

100.

e°  0.755 V
e°  0.96 V

Explain why platinum metal will dissolve in aqua regia (a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids) but not in either concentrated nitric or concentrated hydrochloric acid individually.
95. Consider the standard galvanic cell based on the following halfreactions
Cu 2  2e  ¡ Cu
Ag   e  ¡ Ag
The electrodes in this cell are Ag(s) and Cu(s). Does the cell potential increase, decrease, or remain the same when the following changes occur to the standard cell?
a. CuSO4(s) is added to the copper half-cell compartment (assume no volume change).
b. NH3(aq) is added to the copper half-cell compartment. Hint:
Cu 2 reacts with NH3 to form Cu(NH3 ) 4 2(aq).
c. NaCl(s) is added to the silver half-cell compartment. Hint:
Ag reacts with Cl  to form AgCl(s).
d. Water is added to both half-cell compartments until the volume of solution is doubled.
e. The silver electrode is replaced with a platinum electrode.
Pt 2  2e  ¡ Pt

e°  1.19 V

96. A standard galvanic cell is constructed so that the overall cell
reaction is
2Al 3 1aq2  3M1s2 ¡ 3M 2 1aq2  2Al1s2
where M is an unknown metal. If ¢G°  411 kJ for the overall cell reaction, identify the metal used to construct the standard cell.
97. The black silver sulﬁde discoloration of silverware can be removed by heating the silver article in a sodium carbonate solution in an aluminum pan. The reaction is
3Ag2S1s2  2Al1s2 ∆ 6Ag1s2  3S 2 1aq2  2Al 3 1aq2
a. Using data in Appendix 4, calculate ¢G°, K, and e° for the
above reaction at 25°C. (For Al3(aq), ¢G°f  480. kJ/mol.)
b. Calculate the value of the standard reduction potential for the
following half-reaction:
2e   Ag2S1s2 ¡ 2Ag1s2  S 2 1aq2
98. In 1973 the wreckage of the Civil War ironclad USS Monitor
was discovered near Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. (The
Monitor and the CSS Virginia [formerly the USS Merrimack]
fought the ﬁrst battle between iron-armored ships.) In 1987 investigations were begun to see if the ship could be salvaged. It
was reported in Time (June 22, 1987) that scientists were
considering adding sacriﬁcial anodes of zinc to the rapidly

101.

102.

835

corroding metal hull of the Monitor. Describe how attaching zinc
to the hull would protect the Monitor from further corrosion.
When aluminum foil is placed in hydrochloric acid, nothing happens for the ﬁrst 30 seconds or so. This is followed by vigorous
bubbling and the eventual disappearance of the foil. Explain
these observations.
Which of the following statements concerning corrosion is/are
true? For the false statements, correct them.
a. Corrosion is an example of an electrolytic process.
b. Corrosion of steel involves the reduction of iron coupled with
the oxidation of oxygen.
c. Steel rusts more easily in the dry (arid) Southwest states than
in the humid Midwest states.
d. Salting roads in the winter has the added beneﬁt of hindering the corrosion of steel.
e. The key to cathodic protection is to connect via a wire a metal
more easily oxidized than iron to the steel surface to be
protected.
A patent attorney has asked for your advice concerning the merits of a patent application that describes a single aqueous galvanic cell capable of producing a 12-V potential. Comment.
The overall reaction and equilibrium constant value for a
hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell at 298 K is
2H2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2H2O1l2

K  1.28  1083

a. Calculate e° and ¢G° at 298 K for the fuel cell reaction.
b. Predict the signs of ¢H° and ¢S° for the fuel cell reaction.
c. As temperature increases, does the maximum amount of work
obtained from the fuel cell reaction increase, decrease, or remain the same? Explain.
103. What is the maximum work that can be obtained from a
hydrogen–oxygen fuel cell at standard conditions that produces 1.00 kg of water at 25°C? Why do we say that this is
the maximum work that can be obtained? What are the advantages and disadvantages in using fuel cells rather than the
corresponding combustion reactions to produce electricity?
104. The overall reaction and standard cell potential at 25°C for the
rechargeable nickel–cadmium alkaline battery is
Cd1s2  NiO2 1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡
Ni1OH2 2 1s2  Cd1OH2 2 1s2

e°  1.10 V

For every mole of Cd consumed in the cell, what is the maximum useful work that can be obtained at standard conditions?
105. An experimental fuel cell has been designed that uses carbon
monoxide as fuel. The overall reaction is
2CO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2
The two half-cell reactions are
CO  O 2 ¡ CO2  2e 
O2  4e  ¡ 2O 2
The two half-reactions are carried out in separate compartments
connected with a solid mixture of CeO2 and Gd2O3. Oxide ions
can move through this solid at high temperatures (about 800°C).
¢G for the overall reaction at 800°C under certain concentration conditions is 380 kJ. Calculate the cell potential for this
fuel cell at the same temperature and concentration conditions.

836

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

106. A fuel cell designed to react grain alcohol with oxygen has the
following net reaction:
C2H5OH1l2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2CO2 1g2  3H2O1l2

107.

108.

109.

110.

The maximum work 1 mol of alcohol can yield by this process
is 1320 kJ. What is the theoretical maximum voltage this cell
can achieve?
Gold is produced electrochemically from an aqueous solution of
Au(CN) 2  containing an excess of CN . Gold metal and oxygen gas are produced at the electrodes. What amount (moles) of
O2 will be produced during the production of 1.00 mol of gold?
In the electrolysis of a sodium chloride solution, what volume
of H2(g) is produced in the same time it takes to produce 257 L
of Cl2(g), with both volumes measured at 50.°C and 2.50 atm?
An aqueous solution of an unknown salt of ruthenium is electrolyzed by a current of 2.50 A passing for 50.0 min. If 2.618 g
Ru is produced at the cathode, what is the charge on the ruthenium ions in solution?
It takes 15 kWh (kilowatt-hours) of electrical energy to produce 1.0 kg of aluminum metal from aluminum oxide by the
Hall–Heroult process. Compare this to the amount of energy
necessary to melt 1.0 kg of aluminum metal. Why is it economically feasible to recycle aluminum cans? (The enthalpy of
fusion for aluminum metal is 10.7 kJ/mol [ 1 watt  1 J/s].)

114. A zinc–copper battery is constructed as follows at 25°C:
Zn 0 Zn 2 10.10 M2 0 0 Cu 2 12.50 M2 0 Cu
The mass of each electrode is 200. g.
a. Calculate the cell potential when this battery is ﬁrst connected.
b. Calculate the cell potential after 10.0 A of current has ﬂowed
for 10.0 h. (Assume each half-cell contains 1.00 L of solution.)
c. Calculate the mass of each electrode after 10.0 h.
d. How long can this battery deliver a current of 10.0 A before
it goes dead?
115. A galvanic cell is based on the following half-reactions:
Fe 2  2e  ¡ Fe1s2


2H  2e

¡ H2 1g2

e°  0.440 V
e°  0.000 V

where the iron compartment contains an iron electrode and
[Fe 2 ]  1.00  103 M and the hydrogen compartment contains a platinum electrode, PH2  1.00 atm, and a weak acid,
HA, at an initial concentration of 1.00 M. If the observed cell
potential is 0.333 V at 25°C, calculate the Ka value for the weak
acid HA.
Au 3  3e  ¡ Au

111. Combine the equations

Fe

¢G°  nFe° and



116. Consider a cell based on the following half-reactions:

Challenge Problems
¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°

to derive an expression for e° as a function of temperature. Describe how one can graphically determine ¢H° and ¢S° from
measurements of e° at different temperatures, assuming that
¢H° and ¢S° do not depend on temperature. What property
would you look for in designing a reference half-cell that would
produce a potential relatively stable with respect to temperature?
112. The overall reaction in the lead storage battery is
Pb1s2  PbO2 1s2  2H 1aq2  2HSO4 1aq2 ¡
2PbSO4 1s2  2H2O1l2




a. For the cell reaction ¢H°  315.9 kJ and ¢S°  263.5 J/K.
Calculate e° at 20.°C. Assume ¢H° and ¢S° do not depend
on temperature.
b. Calculate e at 20.°C when [ HSO4  ]  [H  ]  4.5 M.
c. Consider your answer to Exercise 55. Why does it seem that
batteries fail more often on cold days than on warm days?
113. Consider the following galvanic cell:
0.83V
Pb

Ag

1.8 M Pb2+

Calculate the Ksp value for Ag2SO4(s). Note that to obtain silver
ions in the right compartment (the cathode compartment), excess solid Ag2SO4 was added and some of the salt dissolved.

? M Ag+
? M SO42Ag2SO4 (s)

3

e



¡ Fe

2

e°  1.50 V
e°  0.77 V

a. Draw this cell under standard conditions, labeling the anode,
the cathode, the direction of electron ﬂow, and the concentrations, as appropriate.
b. When enough NaCl(s) is added to the compartment containing gold to make the [Cl  ]  0.10 M, the cell potential is
observed to be 0.31 V. Assume that Au3 is reduced and assume that the reaction in the compartment containing gold is
Au 3 1aq2  4Cl  1aq2 ∆ AuCl4  1aq2
Calculate the value of K for this reaction at 25°C.
117. The measurement of pH using a glass electrode obeys the Nernst
equation. The typical response of a pH meter at 25.00°C is given
by the equation
emeas  eref  0.05916 pH
where eref contains the potential of the reference electrode and
all other potentials that arise in the cell that are not related to
the hydrogen ion concentration. Assume that eref  0.250 V and
that emeas  0.480 V.
a. What is the uncertainty in the values of pH and [H] if the
uncertainty in the measured potential is 1 mV (0.001 V)?
b. To what precision must the potential be measured for the uncertainty in pH to be 0.02 pH unit?
118. Zirconium is one of the few metals that retains its structural integrity upon exposure to radiation. For this reason, the fuel rods
in most nuclear reactors are made of zirconium. Answer the following questions about the redox properties of zirconium based
on the half-reaction
ZrO2  H2O  H2O  4e  ¡ Zr  4OH

e°  2.36 V

Integrative Problems
a. Is zirconium metal capable of reducing water to form hydrogen gas at standard conditions?
b. Write a balanced equation for the reduction of water by
zirconium metal.
c. Calculate e°, ¢G°, and K for the reduction of water by zirconium metal.
d. The reduction of water by zirconium occurred during the accident at Three Mile Island, Pennsylvania, in 1979. The hydrogen produced was successfully vented and no chemical
explosion occurred. If 1.00  103 kg of Zr reacts, what mass
of H2 is produced? What volume of H2 at 1.0 atm and 1000.°C
is produced?
e. At Chernobyl, USSR, in 1986, hydrogen was produced by the
reaction of superheated steam with the graphite reactor core:
C1s2  H2O1g2 ¡ CO1g2  H2 1g2
A chemical explosion involving the hydrogen gas did occur
at Chernobyl. In light of this fact, do you think it was a correct decision to vent the hydrogen and other radioactive gases
into the atmosphere at Three Mile Island? Explain.
119. A galvanic cell is based on the following half-reactions:
Ag  e  ¡ Ag1s2

e°  0.80 V

Cu 2  2e  ¡ Cu1s2

e°  0.34 V

In this cell, the silver compartment contains a silver electrode
and excess AgCl(s) (Ksp  1.6  1010 ), and the copper compartment contains a copper electrode and [Cu 2 ]  2.0 M.
a. Calculate the potential for this cell at 25°C.
b. Assuming 1.0 L of 2.0 M Cu 2 in the copper compartment,
calculate the moles of NH3 that would have to be added to
give a cell potential of 0.52 V at 25°C (assume no volume
change on addition of NH3).
Cu 2 1aq2  4NH3 1aq2 ∆
Cu1NH3 2 4 2 1aq2

K  1.0  1013

120. Given the following two standard reduction potentials,
M 3  3e  S M
M 2  2e  S M

e°  0.10 V
e°  0.50 V

solve for the standard reduction potential of the half-reaction
M

3



e SM

2

(Hint: You must use the extensive property ¢G° to determine
the standard reduction potential.)
121. You make a galvanic cell with a piece of nickel, 1.0 M Ni2(aq),
a piece of silver, and 1.0 M Ag(aq). Calculate the concentrations of Ag(aq) and Ni2(aq) once the cell is “dead.”
122. A chemist wishes to determine the concentration of CrO4 2
electrochemically. A cell is constructed consisting of a saturated calomel electrode (SCE; see Exercise 93) and a silver
wire coated with Ag2CrO4. The e° value for the following
half-reaction is 0.446 V relative to the standard hydrogen
electrode:
Ag2CrO4  2e  ¡ 2Ag  CrO4 2
a. Calculate ecell and ¢G at 25°C for the cell reaction when
[CrO42 ]  1.00 mol/L.
b. Write the Nernst equation for the cell. Assume that the SCE
concentrations are constant.

837

c. If the coated silver wire is placed in a solution (at 25°C) in
which [CrO42 ]  1.00  10 5 M, what is the expected cell
potential?
d. The measured cell potential at 25°C is 0.504 V when the
coated wire is dipped into a solution of unknown [CrO42 ].
What is [CrO42 ] for this solution?
e. Using data from this problem and from Table 17.1, calculate
the solubility product (Ksp) for Ag2CrO4.
123. You have a concentration cell with Cu electrodes and [Cu 2 ] 
4
1.00 M (right side) and 1.0  10 M (left side).
a. Calculate the potential for this cell at 25°C.
b. The Cu2 ion reacts with NH3 to form Cu(NH3)42 where
the stepwise formation constants are K1  1.0  10 3, K2 
1.0  10 4, K3  1.0  10 3, and K4  1.0  10 3. Calculate
the new cell potential after enough NH3 is added to the left
cell compartment such that at equilibrium [NH3 ]  2.0 M.
124. When copper reacts with nitric acid, a mixture of NO(g) and
NO2(g) is evolved. The volume ratio of the two product gases
depends on the concentration of the nitric acid according to the
equilibrium
2H  1aq2  2NO3  1aq2  NO1g2 ∆ 3NO2 1g2  H2O1l2
Consider the following standard reduction potentials at 25°C:
3e   4H  1aq2  NO3  1aq2 ¡ NO1g2  2H2O1l2
e°  0.957 V

e   2H  1aq2  NO3  1aq2 ¡ NO2 1g2  2H2O1l2
e°  0.775 V

a. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the above reaction.
b. What concentration of nitric acid will produce a NO and NO2
mixture with only 0.20% NO2 (by moles) at 25°C and 1.00
atm? Assume that no other gases are present and that the
change in acid concentration can be neglected.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

125. The following standard reduction potentials have been determined for the aqueous chemistry of indium:
In 3 1aq2  2e  ¡ In  1aq2
In  1aq2  e  ¡ In1s2

e°  0.444 V
e°  0.126 V

a. What is the equilibrium constant for the disproportionation
reaction, where a species is both oxidized and reduced, shown
below?
3In  1aq2 ¡ 2In1s2  In 3 1aq2
b. What is ¢G°f for In(aq) if ¢G°f  97.9 kJ/mol for
In3(aq)?
126. An electrochemical cell is set up using the following balanced
reaction:
M a 1aq2  N1s2 ¡ N 2 1aq2  M1s2
Given the standard reduction potentials are:
M a  ae  ¡ M
N

2

 2e



¡ N

e°  0.400 V
e°  0.240 V

838

Chapter Seventeen Electrochemistry

The cell contains 0.10 M N2 and produces a voltage of 0.180 V.
If the concentration of Ma is such that the value of the reaction
quotient Q is 9.32  103, calculate [Ma]. Calculate wmax for
this electrochemical cell.
127. Three electrochemical cells were connected in series so that the
same quantity of electrical current passes through all three cells. In
the ﬁrst cell, 1.15 g of chromium metal was deposited from a
chromium(III) nitrate solution. In the second cell, 3.15 g of osmium was deposited from a solution made of Osn and nitrate ions.
What is the name of the salt? In the third cell, the electrical charge
passed through a solution containing X2 ions caused deposition
of 2.11 g of metallic X. What is the electron conﬁguration of X?

Marathon Problems
These problems are designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

128. A galvanic cell is based on the following half-reactions:
Cu 2 1aq2  2e  ¡ Cu1s2
V 2 1aq2  2e  ¡ V1s2

e°  0.34 V
e°  1.20 V

In this cell, the copper compartment contains a copper electrode
and [Cu 2 ]  1.00 M, and the vanadium compartment contains

E1s2 in E 2 1aq2
D1s2 in D 2 1aq2
C1s2 in C 2 1aq2
B1s2 in B 2 1aq2

a vanadium electrode and V2 at an unknown concentration. The
compartment containing the vanadium (1.00 L of solution) was
titrated with 0.0800 M H2EDTA 2, resulting in the reaction
H2EDTA 2 1aq2  V 2 1aq2
∆ VEDTA 2 1aq2  2H  1aq2

K?

The potential of the cell was monitored to determine the stoichiometric point for the process, which occurred at a volume of
500.0 mL of H2EDTA 2 solution added. At the stoichiometric
point, ecell was observed to be 1.98 V. The solution was buffered
at a pH of 10.00.
a. Calculate ecell before the titration was carried out.
b. Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant, K, for the
titration reaction.
c. Calculate ecell at the halfway point in the titration.
129. The table below lists the cell potentials for the 10 possible galvanic cells assembled from the metals A, B, C, D, and E, and
their respective 1.00 M 2 ions in solution. Using the data
in the table, establish a standard reduction potential table
similar to Table 17.1 in the text. Assign a reduction potential
of 0.00 V to the half-reaction that falls in the middle of
the series. You should get two different tables. Explain why,
and discuss what you could do to determine which table is
correct.

A(s) in A2(aq)

B(s) in B2(aq)

C(s) in C2(aq)

D(s) in D2(aq)

0.28 V
0.72 V
0.41 V
0.53 V

0.81 V
0.19 V
0.94 V
—

0.13 V
1.13 V
—
—

1.00 V
—
—
—

Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

18 The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View
Contents
18.1 Nuclear Stability and
Radioactive Decay
• Types of Radioactive Decay
18.2 The Kinetics of Radioactive
Decay
• Half-Life
18.3 Nuclear Transformations
18.4 Detection and Uses of
Radioactivity
• Dating by Radioactivity
• Medical Applications of
Radioactivity
18.5 Thermodynamic Stability of
the Nucleus
18.6 Nuclear Fission and Nuclear
Fusion
• Nuclear Fission
• Nuclear Reactors
• Breeder Reactors
• Fusion
18.7 Effects of Radiation

Workers inside a giant chamber at the National Ignition Facility in California. This chamber will be
used to induce nuclear fusion by aiming 192 lasers at a pellet of fuel.

840

S

The atomic number Z is the number of
protons in a nucleus; the mass number
A is the sum of protons and neutrons in
a nucleus.

The term isotopes refers to a group of
nuclides with the same atomic number.
Each individual atom is properly called
a nuclide, not an isotope.

ince the chemistry of an atom is determined by the number and arrangement of its
electrons, the properties of the nucleus are not of primary importance to chemists. In the
simplest view, the nucleus provides the positive charge to bind the electrons in atoms and
molecules. However, a quick reading of any daily newspaper will show you that the nucleus and its properties have an important impact on our society. This chapter considers
those aspects of the nucleus about which everyone should have some knowledge.
Several aspects of the nucleus are immediately impressive: its very small size, its
very large density, and the magnitude of the energy that holds it together. The radius of
a typical nucleus appears to be about 1013 cm. This can be compared to the radius of
a typical atom, which is on the order of 108 cm. A visualization will help you appreciate
the small size of the nucleus: If the nucleus of the hydrogen atom were the size of a
Ping-Pong ball, the electron in the 1s orbital would be, on average, 0.5 kilometer (0.3
mile) away. The density of the nucleus is equally impressive—approximately 1.6  1014
g/cm3. A sphere of nuclear material the size of a Ping-Pong ball would have a mass of
2.5 billion tons! In addition, the energies involved in nuclear processes are typically
millions of times larger than those associated with normal chemical reactions. This fact
makes nuclear processes very attractive for feeding the voracious energy appetite of our
civilization.
Atomos, the Greek root of the word atom, means “indivisible.” It was originally believed that the atom was the ultimate indivisible particle of which all matter was composed. However, as we discussed in Chapter 2, Lord Rutherford showed in 1911 that the
atom is not homogeneous, but rather has a dense, positively charged center surrounded
by electrons. Subsequently, scientists have learned that the nucleus of the atom can be
subdivided into particles called neutrons and protons. In fact, in the past two decades it
has become apparent that even the protons and neutrons are composed of smaller particles
called quarks.
For most purposes, the nucleus can be regarded as a collection of nucleons (neutrons
and protons), and the internal structures of these particles can be ignored. As we discussed
in Chapter 2, the number of protons in a particular nucleus is called the atomic number
(Z), and the sum of the neutrons and protons is the mass number (A). Atoms that have
identical atomic numbers but different mass number values are called isotopes. However,
we usually do not use the singular form isotope to refer to a particular member of a group
of isotopes. Rather, we use the term nuclide. A nuclide is a unique atom, represented by
the symbol
A
ZX

where X represents the symbol for a particular element. For example, the following nuclides
constitute the isotopes of carbon: carbon-12 (126C), carbon-13 (136 C), and carbon-14 (146C).

18.1

Nuclear Stability and Radioactive Decay

Nuclear stability is the central topic of this chapter and forms the basis for all the important applications related to nuclear processes. Nuclear stability can be considered from
both a kinetic and a thermodynamic point of view. Thermodynamic stability, as we will
use the term here, refers to the potential energy of a particular nucleus as compared with
the sum of the potential energies of its component protons and neutrons. We will use the
term kinetic stability to describe the probability that a nucleus will undergo decomposition

841

842

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View
to form a different nucleus—a process called radioactive decay. We will consider
radioactivity in this section.
Many nuclei are radioactive; that is, they decompose, forming another nucleus and
producing one or more particles. An example is carbon-14, which decays as follows:
14
6C

14
7N

¡



0
1e

where 10e represents an electron, which is called a beta particle, or B particle, in nuclear terminology. This equation is typical of those representing radioactive decay in that
both A and Z must be conserved. That is, the Z values must give the same sum on both
sides of the equation (6  7  1), as must the A values (14  14  0).
Of the approximately 2000 known nuclides, only 279 are stable with respect to radioactive decay. Tin has the largest number of stable isotopes—10.
It is instructive to examine how the numbers of neutrons and protons in a nucleus
are related to its stability with respect to radioactive decay. Figure 18.1 shows a plot
of the positions of the stable nuclei as a function of the number of protons (Z) and the
number of neutrons (A  Z). The stable nuclides are said to reside in the zone of
stability.
The following are some important observations concerning radioactive decay:
• All nuclides with 84 or more protons are unstable with respect to radioactive decay.
• Light nuclides are stable when Z equals A  Z, that is, when the neutron/proton ratio
is 1. However, for heavier elements the neutron/proton ratio required for stability is
greater than 1 and increases with Z.

160

140

202
80

120

Unstable region
(too many neutrons;
spontaneous beta
production)

100

tio

n
to
ro

ra

-p

to

n-

80
St
zo able
ne nu
of cli
sta des
bil in
ity th
e

Number of neutrons (A – Z )

Hg (1.53:1 ratio)

60

tro

u

1

1:

ne

110
48

Cd
(1.29:1 ratio)

40

FIGURE 18.1
The zone of stability. The red dots indicate
the nuclides that do not undergo radioactive decay. Note that as the number
of protons in a nuclide increases, the
neutron/proton ratio required for stability
also increases.

Unstable region
(too many protons;
spontaneous positron
production)

20
6
3

0

0

20

Li (1:1 ratio)
40
60
Number of protons (Z)

80

100

18.1 Nuclear Stability and Radioactive Decay

843

TABLE 18.1 Number of Stable Nuclides Related to Numbers of Protons
and Neutrons
Number of
Protons

Number of
Neutrons

Even
Even
Odd
Odd

Even
Odd
Even
Odd

Number of
Stable Nuclides

Examples

168
57
50
4

12
16
6C, 8O
13
47
C,
6
22Ti
19
23
F,
9
11Na
2
6
1H, 3Li

Note: Even numbers of protons and neutrons seem to favor stability.

• Certain combinations of protons and neutrons seem to confer special stability. For example, nuclides with even numbers of protons and neutrons are more often stable than
those with odd numbers, as shown by the data in Table 18.1.
• There are also certain speciﬁc numbers of protons or neutrons that produce especially
stable nuclides. These magic numbers are 2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, and 126. This behavior
parallels that for atoms in which certain numbers of electrons (2, 10, 18, 36, 54, and 86)
produce special chemical stability (the noble gases).

Types of Radioactive Decay

a-particle production involves a change
in A for the decaying nucleus; b-particle
production has no effect on A.

Radioactive nuclei can undergo decomposition in various ways. These decay processes
fall into two categories: those that involve a change in the mass number of the decaying
nucleus and those that do not. We will consider the former type of process ﬁrst.
An alpha particle, or A particle, is a helium nucleus ( 42He). Alpha-particle production is a very common mode of decay for heavy radioactive nuclides. For example,
238
92U, the predominant (99.3%) isotope of natural uranium, decays by ␣-particle
production:
¡ 42He  234
90Th

238
92U

Another ␣-particle producer is
Visualization: Nuclear Particles

230
90Th:

¡ 42He  226
88Ra

230
90 Th

Another decay process in which the mass number of the decaying nucleus changes
is spontaneous ﬁssion, the splitting of a heavy nuclide into two lighter nuclides with
similar mass numbers. Although this process occurs at an extremely slow rate for most
nuclides, it is important in some cases, such as for 254
98Cf, where spontaneous ﬁssion is the
predominant mode of decay.
The most common decay process in which the mass number of the decaying nucleus
remains constant is B-particle production. For example, the thorium-234 nuclide
produces a b particle and is converted to protactinium-234:
234
90 Th

¡

234
91Pa

 10e

Iodine-131 is also a ␤-particle producer:
131
53I

¡

0
1e

 131
54Xe

The b particle is assigned the mass number 0, since its mass is tiny compared with that
of a proton or neutron. Because the value of Z is 1 for the b particle, the atomic number for the new nuclide is greater by 1 than for the original nuclide. Thus the net effect
of b-particle production is to change a neutron to a proton. We therefore expect nuclides

844

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View
that lie above the zone of stability (those nuclides whose neutron/proton ratios are too
high) to be b-particle producers.
It should be pointed out that although the b particle is an electron, the emitting nucleus
does not contain electrons. As we shall see later in this chapter, a given quantity of energy (which is best regarded as a form of matter) can become a particle (another form of
matter) under certain circumstances. The unstable nuclide creates an electron as it releases
energy in the decay process. The electron thus results from the decay process rather than
being present before the decay occurs. Think of this as somewhat like talking: Words are
not stored inside us but are formed as we speak. Later in this chapter we will discuss in
more detail this very interesting phenomenon where matter in the form of particles and
matter in the form of energy can interchange.
A gamma ray, or  ray, refers to a high-energy photon. Frequently, g-ray production accompanies nuclear decays and particle reactions, such as in the a-particle decay
of 238
92U:
238
92U

0
¡ 42He  234
90 Th  2 0g

where two g rays of different energies are produced in addition to the a particle. The
emission of g rays is one way a nucleus with excess energy (in an excited nuclear state)
can relax to its ground state.
Positron production occurs for nuclides that are below the zone of stability (those
nuclides whose neutron/proton ratios are too small). The positron is a particle with the
same mass as the electron but opposite charge. An example of a nuclide that decays by
positron production is sodium-22:
22
11Na

¡ 01e  22
10Ne

Note that the net effect is to change a proton to a neutron, causing the product nuclide to
have a higher neutron/proton ratio than the original nuclide.
Besides being oppositely charged, the positron shows an even more fundamental difference from the electron: It is the antiparticle of the electron. When a positron collides
with an electron, the particulate matter is changed to electromagnetic radiation in the form
of high-energy photons:
0
1e

 01e ¡ 2 00g

This process, which is characteristic of matter–antimatter collisions, is called annihilation
and is another example of the interchange of the forms of matter.
Electron capture is a process in which one of the inner-orbital electrons is captured
by the nucleus, as illustrated by the process
201
80 Hg

0
1e

¡

201
79 Au

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩



 00g

Inner-orbital electron

This reaction would have been of great interest to the alchemists, but unfortunately it does
not occur at a rate that would make it a practical means for changing mercury to gold.
Gamma rays are always produced along with electron capture to release excess energy.
The various types of radioactive decay are summarized in Table 18.2.

Sample Exercise 18.1

Nuclear Equations I
Write balanced equations for each of the following processes.
a.
b.
c.

11
6C produces a positron.
241
83Bi produces a b particle.
237
93Np produces an a particle.

18.1 Nuclear Stability and Radioactive Decay

TABLE 18.2

845

Various Types of Radioactive Processes Showing the Changes That Take Place in the Nuclides

Process
b-particle (electron) production
Positron production
Electron capture
a-particle production
g-ray production
Spontaneous ﬁssion

Change
in A

Change
in Z

Change in
Neutron/Proton Ratio

0
0
0
4
0
—

1
1
1
2
0
—

Decrease
Increase
Increase
Increase
—
—

Example
227
227
0
89 Ac ¡ 90Th  1e
13
13
0
7N ¡ 6C  1e
73
0
73
33As  1e ¡ 32Ge
210
206
4
84Po ¡ 82Pb  2He

Excited nucleus ¡ ground-state nucleus  00g
¡ lighter nuclides  neutrons

254
98Cf

Solution
a. We must ﬁnd the product nuclide represented by AZX in the following equation:
11
6C

¡ 01e  AZ X
h

Positron

We can ﬁnd the identity of AZX by recognizing that the total of the Z and A values must
be the same on both sides of the equation. Thus for X, Z must be 6  1  5 and A
must be 11  0  11. Therefore, AZX is 115 B. (The fact that Z is 5 tells us that the nuclide is boron.) Thus the balanced equation is
11
6C

¡ 01e  115B

b. Knowing that a b particle is represented by
can write
214
83Bi

¡

0
1e

0
1e

and that Z and A are conserved, we

 214
84X

so AZX must be 214
84Po.
c. Since an a particle is represented by 42He, the balanced equation must be
237
93Np

¡ 42He  233
91Pa
See Exercises 18.11 and 18.12.

Sample Exercise 18.2

Nuclear Equations II
In each of the following nuclear reactions, supply the missing particle.
a.
b.

195
195
79 Au  ? S 78Pt
38
38
19K S 18Ar  ?

Solution
a. Since A does not change and Z decreases by 1, the missing particle must be an electron:
195
79Au



0
1e

¡

195
78Pt

This is an example of electron capture.
b. To conserve Z and A, the missing particle must be a positron:
38
19K

¡

38
18Ar

 01e

Thus potassium-38 decays by positron production.
See Exercises 18.13 and 18.14.

846

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

U

238
236

Th Pa U

234
232

Th

230

Mass number (A)

228
Ra

226
224
Rn

222
220
Po

218
216

FIGURE 18.2
206
The decay series from 238
92 U to 82Pb. Each
nuclide in the series except 206
82Pb. is unstable, and the successive transformations
(shown by the arrows) continue until 206
82Pb
is ﬁnally formed. Note that horizontal
arrows indicate processes where A is
unchanged, while diagonal arrows signify
that both A and Z change.

Pb Bi Po

214
212

Pb Bi Po

210
208

Pb

206
204

0

82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93
Atomic number (Z)

Often a radioactive nucleus cannot reach a stable state through a single decay process.
In such a case, a decay series occurs until a stable nuclide is formed. A well-known ex206
ample is the decay series that starts with 238
92U and ends with 82Pb, as shown in Fig. 18.2.
235
Similar series exist for 92U:
235
92U

and for

207
82Pb

232
90Th:
232
90Th

18.2
Rates of reaction are discussed in
Chapter 12.

Series of

¡
decays
Series of

¡
decays

208
82Pb

The Kinetics of Radioactive Decay

In a sample containing radioactive nuclides of a given type, each nuclide has a certain
probability of undergoing decay. Suppose that a sample of 1000 atoms of a certain nuclide produces 10 decay events per hour. This means that over the span of an hour, 1 out
of every 100 nuclides will decay. Given that this probability of decay is characteristic for
this type of nuclide, we could predict that a 2000-atom sample would give 20 decay events
per hour. Thus, for radioactive nuclides, the rate of decay, which is the negative of the
change in the number of nuclides per unit time
a

¢N
b
¢t

is directly proportional to the number of nuclides N in a given sample:
Rate  

¢N
r N
¢t

18.2 The Kinetics of Radioactive Decay

847

The negative sign is included because the number of nuclides is decreasing. We now insert
a proportionality constant k to give
Rate  

¢N
 kN
¢t

This is the rate law for a ﬁrst-order process, as we saw in Chapter 12. As shown in Section 12.4, the integrated ﬁrst-order rate law is
ln a

N
b  kt
N0

where N0 represents the original number of nuclides (at t  0) and N represents the number
remaining at time t.

Half-Life
Visualization: Half-Life of
Nuclear Decay

The half-life (t1 2 ) of a radioactive sample is deﬁned as the time required for the number
of nuclides to reach half the original value (N0 2). We can use this deﬁnition in connection
with the integrated ﬁrst-order rate law (as we did in Section 12.4) to produce the following
expression for t1 2:
t1 2 

ln122
0.693

k
k

Thus, if the half-life of a radioactive nuclide is known, the rate constant can be easily
calculated, and vice versa.
Sample Exercise 18.3

Kinetics of Nuclear Decay I
Technetium-99m is used to form pictures of internal organs in the body and is often used
to assess heart damage. The m for this nuclide indicates an excited nuclear state that decays to the ground state by gamma emission. The rate constant for decay of 99m
043Tc is known
to be 1.16  101/h. What is the half-life of this nuclide?
Solution
The half-life can be calculated from the expression
0.693
0.693

k
1.16  101/h
 5.98 h

t1 2 

The image of a bone scan of a normal chest
(posterior view). Radioactive technetium99m is injected into the patient and is then
concentrated in bones, allowing a physician
to look for abnormalities such as might be
caused by cancer.

The harmful effects of radiation will be
discussed in Section 18.7.

Thus it will take 5.98 h for a given sample of technetium-99m to decrease to half the original number of nuclides.
See Exercise 18.21.

As we saw in Section 12.4, the half-life for a ﬁrst-order process is constant. This is
shown for the b-particle decay of strontium-90 in Fig. 18.3; it takes 28.8 years for each
90
halving of the amount of 90
38Sr. Contamination of the environment with 38Sr poses serious
health hazards because of the similar chemistry of strontium and calcium (both are in
Group 2A). Strontium-90 in grass and hay is incorporated into cow’s milk along with
calcium and is then passed on to humans, where it lodges in the bones. Because of its relatively long half-life, it persists for years in humans, causing radiation damage that may
lead to cancer.

848

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

10.0

Sr (g)

4.0

1 halflife

90
38

6.0

Mass of

8.0

2 halflives
3 halflives

2.0

0

FIGURE 18.3
The decay of a 10.0-g sample of
strontium-90 over time. Note that the
half-life is a constant 28.8 years.

Sample Exercise 18.4

20

40

60

t1/2 = 28.8 t1/2 = 28.8

80

t1/2 = 28.8

4 halflives

100

120

t1/2 = 28.8

Time (yr)

Kinetics of Nuclear Decay II
The half-life of molybdenum-99 is 67.0 h. How much of a 1.000-mg sample of 99
42Mo is
left after 335 h?
Solution
The easiest way to solve this problem is to recognize that 335 h represents ﬁve half-lives
for 99
42Mo:
335  5  67.0
We can sketch the change that occurs, as is shown in Fig. 18.4. Thus, after 335 h, 0.031 mg
99
42Mo remains.
See Exercise 18.23.
The half-lives of radioactive nuclides vary over a tremendous range. For example,
4
has a half-life of 5  1015 years, while 214
second. To
84Po has a half-life of 2  10
238
give you some perspective on this, the half-lives of the nuclides in the 92U decay series
are given in Table 18.3.

144
60Nd

Mo (mg)

1.000 mg

99
42

0.500 mg
0.250 mg
0.125 mg
0.062 mg

FIGURE 18.4
The change in the amount of 99
42Mo with
time (t1 2  67 h).

67

67

67

67
Time (h)

67

0.031 mg

18.3 Nuclear Transformations

TABLE 18.3

The Half-Lives of Nuclides in the

Nuclide

Decay Series

Particle Produced
1 238
92U2

Uranium-238
T
Thorium-234 1 234
90Th2
T
Protactinium-234 1 234
91Pa2
T
Uranium-234 1 234
92U2
T
Thorium-230 1 230
90Th2
T
Radium-226 1 226
88Ra2
T
Radon-222 1 222
86Rn2
T
Polonium-218 1 218
84Po2
T
Lead-214 1 214
82Pb2
T
Bismuth-214 1 214
83Bi2
T
Polonium-214 1 214
84Po2
T
Lead-210 1 210
82Pb2
T
Bismuth-210 1 210
83Bi2
T
Polonium-210 1 210
84Po2
T
Lead-206 1 206
82Pb2

18.3

238
92U

849

Half-Life

a

4.51  109 years

b

24.1 days

b

6.75 hours

a

2.48  105 years

a

8.0  104 years

a

1.62  103 years

a

3.82 days

a

3.1 minutes

b

26.8 minutes

b

19.7 minutes

a

1.6  104 second

b

20.4 years

b

5.0 days

a

138.4 days

—

Stable

Nuclear Transformations

In 1919 Lord Rutherford observed the ﬁrst nuclear transformation, the change of one
element into another. He found that by bombarding 147N with a particles, the nuclide 178O
could be produced:
14
7N

 42He ¡

17
8O

 11H

Fourteen years later, Irene Curie and her husband Frederick Joliot observed a similar transformation from aluminum to phosphorus:
27
13Al

 42He ¡

30
15P

 10n

where 10n represents a neutron.
Over the years, many other nuclear transformations have been achieved, mostly using
particle accelerators, which, as the name reveals, are devices used to give particles very
high velocities. Because of the electrostatic repulsion between the target nucleus and a
positive ion, accelerators are needed when positive ions are used as bombarding particles. The particle, accelerated to a very high velocity, can overcome the repulsion and
penetrate the target nucleus, thus effecting the transformation. A schematic diagram of
one type of particle accelerator, the cyclotron, is shown in Fig. 18.5. The ion is introduced at the center of the cyclotron and is accelerated in an expanding spiral path by use
of alternating electric ﬁelds in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. The linear accelerator

850

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Stellar Nucleosynthesis
ow did all the matter around us originate? The scientiﬁc answer to this question is a theory called stellar
nucleosynthesis—literally, the formation of nuclei in stars.
Many scientists believe that our universe originated
as a cloud of neutrons that became unstable and produced
an immense explosion, giving this model its name—the
big bang theory. The model postulates that, following the
initial explosion, neutrons decomposed into protons and
electrons,

expand due to the heat from fusion and the tendency to
contract due to the forces of gravity are balanced, a stable
young star such as our sun can be formed.
Eventually, when the supply of hydrogen is exhausted, the core of the star will again contract with further heating until temperatures are reached where fusion
of helium nuclei can occur, leading to the formation of 126C
and 168O nuclei. In turn, when the supply of helium nuclei
runs out, further contraction and heating will occur, until
fusion of heavier nuclei takes place. This process occurs
repeatedly, forming heavier and heavier nuclei until iron
nuclei are formed. Because the iron nucleus is the most
stable of all, energy is required to fuse iron nuclei. This
endothermic fusion process cannot furnish energy to sustain the star, and therefore it cools to a small, dense white
dwarf.

H

1
0n

¡ 11H 

0
1e

which eventually recombined to form clouds of hydrogen.
Over the eons, gravitational forces caused many of these hydrogen clouds to contract and heat up sufﬁciently to reach
temperatures where proton fusion was possible, which
released large quantities of energy. When the tendency to

illustrated in Fig. 18.6 employs changing electric ﬁelds to achieve high velocities on a
linear pathway.
In addition to positive ions, neutrons are often employed as bombarding particles to
effect nuclear transformations. Because neutrons are uncharged and thus not repelled electrostatically by a target nucleus, they are readily absorbed by many nuclei, leading to new
nuclides. The most common source of neutrons for this purpose is a ﬁssion reactor (see
Section 18.6).
Hollow D-shaped
electrodes
Direction of magnetic field

(±)

Target

Exit
port

Oscillating
voltage
(±)

Ion source

FIGURE 18.5
A schematic diagram of a cyclotron. The ion is introduced in the center and is pulled back and forth
between the hollow D-shaped electrodes by constant
reversals of the electric ﬁeld. Magnets above and
below these electrodes produce a spiral path that expands as the particle velocity increases. When the
particle has sufﬁcient speed, it exits the accelerator
and is directed at the target nucleus.

18.3 Nuclear Transformations

851

The evolution just described is characteristic of small
and medium-sized stars. Much larger stars, however, become
unstable at some time during their evolution and undergo a
supernova explosion. In this explosion, some medium-mass
nuclei are fused to form heavy elements. Also, some light
nuclei capture neutrons. These neutron-rich nuclei then produce b particles, increasing their atomic number with each
event. This eventually leads to heavy nuclei. In fact, almost
all nuclei heavier than iron are thought to originate from supernova explosions. The debris of a supernova explosion
thus contains a large variety of elements and might eventually form a solar system such as our own.
Although other theories for the origin of matter have
been suggested, there is much evidence to support the big
bang theory, and it continues to be widely accepted.

For more information see V. E. Viola, “Formation of the chemical elements and the evolution of our universe,” J. Chem. Ed. 67 (1990): 723.

Image of a portion of the Cygnus Loop supernova
remnant, taken by the Hubble space telescope.

By using neutron and positive-ion bombardment, scientists have been able to extend
the periodic table. Prior to 1940, the heaviest known element was uranium (Z  92), but
in 1940, neptunium (Z  93) was produced by neutron bombardment of 238
92U. The process
239
initially gives 239
92U, which decays to 93Np by b-particle production:
238
92U

A physicist works with a small cyclotron at
the University of California at Berkeley.

 10n ¡

239
92U

¬¬¬¡
t  23 min
12

238
92Np



0
1p

In the years since 1940, the elements with atomic numbers 93 through 112, called
the transuranium elements,* have been synthesized. Many of these elements have very
short half-lives, as shown in Table 18.4. As a result, only a few atoms of some have ever
been formed. This, of course, makes the chemical characterization of these elements
extremely difﬁcult.

Ion
source

2
1

4
3

6
5

Target

FIGURE 18.6
Schematic diagram of a linear accelerator, which uses a changing electric
ﬁeld to accelerate a positive ion along a linear path. As the ion leaves the
source, the odd-numbered tubes are negatively charged, and the evennumbered tubes are positively charged. The positive ion is thus attracted
into tube 1. As the ion leaves tube 1, the tube polarities are reversed.
Now tube 1 is positive, repelling the positive ion, and tube 2 is negative,
attracting the positive ion. This process continues, eventually producing
high particle velocity.

*For more information see G. B. Kauffman, “Beyond uranium,” Chem. Eng. News (Nov. 19, 1990): 18.

852

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

TABLE 18.4

Syntheses of Some of the Transuranium Elements

Element

Neutron Bombardment

Neptunium
1Z  932
Plutonium
1Z  942
Americium
1Z  952

238
92 U

239
93 Np
239
94 Pu

Element

239
94 Pu

239
94 Pu



2.35 days 1 239
93 Np2

0
1e

24,400 years 1 239
94 Pu2

 10e

 2 10 n ¡

241
94 Pu

241
95 Am

¡

 42He ¡

242
96 Cm



458 years 1 241
95 Am2

0
1 e

Half-Life
163 days 1 242
96 Cm2

 10 n

242
4
245
1
96 Cm  2He ¡ 98 Cf  0 n
12
246
or 238
92 U  6 C ¡ 98 Cf 

Rutherfordium
1Z  1042
Dubnium
1Z  1052
Seaborgium
1Z  1062

Geiger counters are often called survey
meters in the industry.

¡

239
93 Np

Positive-Ion Bombardment

Curium
1Z  962
Californium
1Z  982

18.4

 10 n ¡

Half-Life

44 minutes 1 245
98 Cf2
4 10 n

249
98 Cf

 126C ¡

257
104 Rf

 4 10 n

249
98 Cf

 157N ¡

260
105 Db

 4 10 n

249
98 Cf

 188O ¡

263
106 Sg

 4 10 n

Detection and Uses of Radioactivity

Although various instruments measure radioactivity levels, the most familiar of them is
the Geiger–Müller counter, or Geiger counter (see Fig. 18.7). This instrument takes advantage of the fact that the high-energy particles from radioactive decay processes produce ions when they travel through matter. The probe of the Geiger counter is ﬁlled with
argon gas, which can be ionized by a rapidly moving particle. This reaction is demonstrated by the equation:
Ar1g2 ¬¬¬¡
Ar 1g2  e
particle
High-energy

Visualization: Geiger Counter

Normally, a sample of argon gas will not conduct a current when an electrical potential
is applied. However, the formation of ions and electrons produced by the passage of the
high-energy particle allows a momentary current to ﬂow. Electronic devices detect this
current ﬂow, and the number of these events can be counted. Thus the decay rate of the
radioactive sample can be determined.
Another instrument often used to detect levels of radioactivity is a scintillation
counter, which takes advantage of the fact that certain substances, such as zinc sulﬁde,

Amplifier
and counter

FIGURE 18.7
A schematic representation of a
Geiger–Müller counter. The high-energy
radioactive particle enters the window and
ionizes argon atoms along its path. The
resulting ions and electrons produce a momentary current pulse, which is ampliﬁed
and counted.

+ e–
+e

(+)

(–)

Argon atoms

–

+ e–

Window
Particle
path

18.4 Detection and Uses of Radioactivity

853

give off light when they are struck by high-energy radiation. A photocell senses the ﬂashes
of light that occur as the radiation strikes and thus measures the number of decay events
per unit of time.

Dating by Radioactivity
Archeologists, geologists, and others involved in reconstructing the ancient history of the
earth rely heavily on radioactivity to provide accurate dates for artifacts and rocks. A method
that has been very important for dating ancient articles made from wood or cloth is radiocarbon dating, or carbon-14 dating, a technique originated in the 1940s by Willard
Libby, an American chemist who received a Nobel Prize for his efforts in this ﬁeld.
Radiocarbon dating is based on the radioactivity of the nuclide 146C, which decays via
b-particle production:
14
6C

Brigham Young researcher Scott Woodward
taking a bone sample for carbon-14 dating
at an archeological site in Egypt.

Radioactive nuclides are often called
radionuclides. Carbon dating is based on
the radionuclide 146C.
The 146C 126C ratio is the basis for carbon14 dating.

A dendrochronologist cutting a section
from a dead tree in South Africa.

Sample Exercise 18.5

¡

0
1e

 147N

Carbon-14 is continuously produced in the atmosphere when high-energy neutrons from
space collide with nitrogen-14:
14
7N

 10n ¡

14
6C

 11H

Thus carbon-14 is continuously produced by this process, and it continuously decomposes
through b-particle production. Over the years, the rates for these two processes have become equal, and like a participant in a chemical reaction at equilibrium, the amount of
14
6C that is present in the atmosphere remains approximately constant.
Carbon-14 can be used to date wood and cloth artifacts because the 146C, along with
the other carbon isotopes in the atmosphere, reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide.
A living plant consumes carbon dioxide in the photosynthesis process and incorporates
the carbon, including 146C, into its molecules. As long as the plant lives, the 146C 126C ratio
in its molecules remains the same as in the atmosphere because of the continuous uptake
of carbon. However, as soon as a tree is cut to make a wooden bowl or a ﬂax plant is harvested to make linen, the 146C 126C ratio begins to decrease because of the radioactive decay
of 146C (the 126C nuclide is stable). Since the half-life of 146C is 5730 years, a wooden bowl
found in an archeological dig showing a 146C 126C ratio that is half that found in currently
living trees is approximately 5730 years old. This reasoning assumes that the current
14
12
6C 6C ratio is the same as that found in ancient times.
Dendrochronologists, scientists who date trees from annual growth rings, have used
data collected from long-lived species of trees, such as bristlecone pines and sequoias, to
show that the 146C content of the atmosphere has changed signiﬁcantly over the ages. These
data have been used to derive correction factors that allow very accurate dates to be determined from the observed 146C 126C ratio in an artifact, especially for artifacts 10,000 years
old or younger. Recent measurements of uranium/thorium ratios in ancient coral indicate
that dates in the 20,000- to 30,000-year range may have errors as large as 3000 years. As
a result, efforts are now being made to recalibrate the 146C dates over this period.
14

C Dating

The remnants of an ancient ﬁre in a cave in Africa showed a 146C decay rate of 3.1 counts
per minute per gram of carbon. Assuming that the decay rate of 146C in freshly cut wood
(corrected for changes in the 146C content of the atmosphere) is 13.6 counts per minute per
gram of carbon, calculate the age of the remnants. The half-life of 146C is 5730 years.
Solution
The key to solving this problem is to realize that the decay rates given are directly propor14
tional to the number of 6C nuclides present. Radioactive decay follows ﬁrst-order kinetics:
Rate  kN

854

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View
Thus
Number of nuclides
o present at time t

3.1 counts/min  g
rate at time t
kN


13.6 counts/min  g
rate at time 0
kN0

r Number of nuclides
present at time 0



N
 0.23
N0

We can now use the integrated ﬁrst-order rate law:
ln a
k

where

N
b  kt
N0

0.693
0.693

t1 2
5730 years

to solve for t, the time elapsed since the campﬁre:
ln a

N
0.693
b  ln10.232  a
bt
N0
5730 years

Solving this equation gives t  12,000 years; the campﬁre in the cave occurred about
12,000 years ago.
See Exercises 18.31 and 18.32.
One drawback of radiocarbon dating is that a fairly large piece of the object (from
a half to several grams) must be burned to form carbon dioxide, which is then analyzed
for radioactivity. Another method for counting 146C nuclides avoids destruction of a significant portion of a valuable artifact. This technique, requiring only about 103 g, uses a
mass spectrometer (see Chapter 3), in which the carbon atoms are ionized and accelerated
through a magnetic ﬁeld that deﬂects their path. Because of their different masses, the various ions are deﬂected by different amounts and can be counted separately. This allows a
very accurate determination of the 146C126C ratio in the sample.
In their attempts to establish the geologic history of the earth, geologists have made
206
extensive use of radioactivity. For example, since 238
92U decays to the stable 82Pb nuclide,
206
238
the ratio of 82Pb to 92U in a rock can, under favorable circumstances, be used to esti176
mate the age of the rock. The radioactive nuclide 176
71Lu, which decays to 72Hf , has a halflife of 37 billion years (only 186 nuclides out of 10 trillion decay each year!). Thus this
nuclide can be used to date very old rocks. With this technique, scientists have estimated
that the earth’s crust formed 4.3 billion years ago.
Sample Exercise 18.6
Because the half-life of 238
92U is very long
compared with those of the other members of the decay series (see Table 18.3)
to reach 206
82Pb, the number of nuclides
present in intermediate stages of decay
is negligible. That is, once a 238
92U nuclide
starts to decay, it reaches 206
82Pb relatively
fast.

Dating by Radioactivity
206
A rock containing 238
92U and 82Pb was examined to determine its approximate age. Analy206
sis showed the ratio of 82Pb atoms to 238
92U atoms to be 0.115. Assuming that no lead was
originally present, that all the 206
82Pb formed over the years has remained in the rock, and
206
that the number of nuclides in intermediate stages of decay between 238
92U and 82Pb is neg238
9
ligible, calculate the age of the rock. The half-life of 92U is 4.5  10 years.

Solution
This problem can be solved using the integrated ﬁrst-order rate law:
lna

N
0.693
b  kt  a
bt
N0
4.5  109 years

18.4 Detection and Uses of Radioactivity

855

where NN0 represents the ratio of 238
92U atoms now found in the rock to the number present when the rock was formed. We are assuming that each 206
82Pb nuclide present must have
U
come from decay of a 238
atom:
92
238
92U

¡

206
82Pb

Thus
Number of 238
92U atoms
originally present



number of 206
82 Pb atoms
now present



number of 238
92 U atoms
now present

Atoms of 206
0.115
115
82Pb now present
 0.115 

1.000
1000
Atoms of 238
U
now
present
92
Think carefully about what this means. For every 1115 238
92U atoms originally present in the
238
rock, 115 have been changed to 206
82Pb and 1000 remain as 92U. Thus
oNow present

206
82Pb

 238
92U



1000
 0.8969
1115

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

N

N0

238
92U

23 8
9 2U

ln a

originally present

N
0.693
bt
b  ln10.89692  a
N0
4.5  109 years
t  7.1  108 years

This is the approximate age of the rock. It was formed sometime in the Cambrian period.
See Exercises 18.33 and 18.34.

Medical Applications of Radioactivity
Although the rapid advances of the medical sciences in recent decades are due to many
causes, one of the most important has been the discovery and use of radiotracers, radioactive
nuclides that can be introduced into organisms in food or drugs and whose pathways can
be traced by monitoring their radioactivity. For example, the incorporation of nuclides such
as 146C and 32
15P into nutrients has produced important information about metabolic pathways.
Iodine-131 has proved very useful in the diagnosis and treatment of illnesses of the
thyroid gland. Patients drink a solution containing small amounts of Na131I, and the uptake of the iodine by the thyroid gland is monitored with a scanner (see Fig. 18.8).

A pellet containing radioactive

131

I.

FIGURE 18.8
After consumption of Na131l, the patient’s thyroid is scanned for radioactivity levels to determine
the efﬁciency of iodine absorption. (left) A normal thyroid. (right) An enlarged thyroid.

856

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

TABLE 18.5 Some Radioactive Nuclides, with Half-Lives and
Medical Applications as Radiotracers
Nuclide
131

I
Fe
99
Mo
32
P
51
Cr
87
Sr
99m
Tc
133
Xe
24
Na
59

Half-Life

Area of the Body Studied

8.1 days
45.1 days
67 hours
14.3 days
27.8 days
2.8 hours
6.0 hours
5.3 days
14.8 hours

Thyroid
Red blood cells
Metabolism
Eyes, liver, tumors
Red blood cells
Bones
Heart, bones, liver, and lungs
Lungs
Circulatory system

Thallium-201 can be used to assess the damage to the heart muscle in a person who
has suffered a heart attack, because thallium is concentrated in healthy muscle tissue.
Technetium-99m is also taken up by normal heart tissue and is used for damage assessment in a similar way.
Radiotracers provide sensitive and noninvasive methods for learning about biologic
systems, for detection of disease, for monitoring the action and effectiveness of drugs, and
for early detection of pregnancy, and their usefulness should continue to grow. Some useful radiotracers are listed in Table 18.5.

18.5

Thermodynamic Stability of the Nucleus

We can determine the thermodynamic stability of a nucleus by calculating the change in
potential energy that would occur if that nucleus were formed from its constituent protons and neutrons. For example, let’s consider the hypothetical process of forming a 168 O
nucleus from eight neutrons and eight protons:
8 10n  8 11H ¡

16
8O

The energy change associated with this process can be calculated by comparing the sum
of the masses of eight protons and eight neutrons with that of the oxygen nucleus:
Mass of 18 10n  8 11H2  811.67493  1024 g2  811.67262  1024 g2
h

h

Mass of 10n

Mass of 11H

 2.67804  1023 g
Mass of 168O nucleus  2.65535  1023 g
The difference in mass for one nucleus is
Mass of 168O  mass of 18 10n  8 11H2  2.269  1025 g
The difference in mass for formation of 1 mole of

16
8O

nuclei is therefore

12.269  1025 g/nucleus216.022  1023 nuclei/mol2  0.1366 g/mol

Energy is a form of matter.

Thus 0.1366 g of mass would be lost if 1 mole of oxygen-16 were formed from protons
and neutrons. What is the reason for this difference in mass, and how can this information be used to calculate the energy change that accompanies this process?
The answers to these questions can be found in the work of Albert Einstein. As we
discussed in Section 7.2, Einstein’s theory of relativity showed that energy should be considered a form of matter. His famous equation
E  mc2

18.5 Thermodynamic Stability of the Nucleus

The energy changes associated with normal chemical reactions are small enough
that the corresponding mass changes are
not detectable.

857

where c is the speed of light, gives the relationship between a quantity of energy and its
mass. When a system gains or loses energy, it also gains or loses a quantity of mass, given
by Ec 2. Thus the mass of a nucleus is less than that of its component nucleons because
the process is so exothermic.
Einstein’s equation in the form
Energy change  ¢E  ¢mc2
where m is the change in mass, or the mass defect, can be used to calculate E for the
hypothetical formation of a nucleus from its component nucleons.

Sample Exercise 18.7

Nuclear Binding Energy I
Calculate the change in energy if 1 mol 168 O nuclei was formed from neutrons and protons.
Solution
We have already calculated that 0.1366 g of mass would be lost in the hypothetical process
of assembling 1 mol 168O nuclei from the component nucleons. We can calculate the change
in energy for this process from
¢E  ¢mc2
where
c  3.00  108 m/s and

¢m  0.1366 g/mol  1.366  104 kg/mol

Thus
¢E  11.366  104 kg/mol213.00  108 m/s2 2  1.23  1013 J/mol
The negative sign for the E value indicates that the process is exothermic. Energy, and
thus mass, is lost from the system.
See Exercises 18.35 through 18.37.
The energy changes observed for nuclear processes are extremely large compared
with those observed for chemical and physical changes. Thus nuclear processes constitute
a potentially valuable energy resource.
The thermodynamic stability of a particular nucleus is normally represented as energy released per nucleon. To illustrate how this quantity is obtained, we will continue to
consider 168 O. First, we calculate E per nucleus by dividing the molar value from Sample Exercise 18.7 by Avogadro’s number:
¢E per 168O nucleus 

1.23  1013 J/mol
 2.04  1011 J/nucleus
6.022  1023 nuclei/mol

In terms of a more convenient energy unit, a million electronvolts (MeV), where
1 MeV  1.60  1013 J
¢E per 168O nucleus  12.04  1011 J/nucleus2 a

1 MeV
b
1.60  1013 J

 1.28  102 MeV/nucleus
Next, we can calculate the value of E per nucleon by dividing by A, the sum of neutrons and protons:
¢E per nucleon for 168O 

1.28  102 MeV/nucleus
16 nucleons/nucleus

 7.98 MeV/nucleon

858

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

Binding energy per nucleon (MeV)

9

FIGURE 18.9
The binding energy per nucleon as a function of mass number. The most stable nuclei are at the top of the curve. The most
stable nucleus is 56
26Fe.

56

16

O

12

C

Fe

84

Kr

119

Sn
205

34

S

8

Tl

235

U

14

N
4
He

7
6

238

U

7
6

5

Li
Li

4
3

3

H
He

3

2
2

1
0

H

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260
Mass number (A)

This means that 7.98 MeV of energy per nucleon would be released if 168 O were formed
from neutrons and protons. The energy required to decompose this nucleus into its components has the same numeric value but a positive sign (since energy is required). This is
called the binding energy per nucleon for 168 O.
The values of the binding energy per nucleon for the various nuclides are shown in
Fig. 18.9. Note that the most stable nuclei (those requiring the largest energy per nucleon
to decompose the nucleus) occur at the top of the curve. The most stable nucleus known
is 56
26 Fe, which has a binding energy per nucleon of 8.79 MeV.
Sample Exercise 18.8

Nuclear Binding Energy II
Calculate the binding energy per nucleon for the 42 He nucleus (atomic masses: 42 He 
4.0026 amu; 11 H  1.0078 amu).
Solution
First, we must calculate the mass defect ( m) for 42 He. Since atomic masses (which include
the electrons) are given, we must decide how to account for the electron mass:
4.0026  mass of 42He atom  mass of 42He nucleus  2me
p

Electron mass

o

1.0078  mass of 11H atom  mass of 11H nucleus  me

Thus, since a 42 He nucleus is “synthesized” from two protons and two neutrons, we see
that
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

Mass of 42 He
nucleus

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

¢m  14.0026  2me 2  3211.0078  me 2  211.00872 4
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Since atomic masses include the masses
of the electrons, to obtain the mass of a
given atomic nucleus from its atomic
mass, we must subtract the mass of the
electrons.

Mass of 11 H
nucleus (proton)

Mass of
neutron

 4.0026  2me  211.00782  2me  211.00872
 4.0026  211.00782  211.00872
 0.0304 amu
Note that in this case the electron mass cancels out in taking the difference. This will always happen in this type of calculation if the atomic masses are used both for the nuclide
of interest and for 11 H. Thus 0.0304 amu of mass is lost per 42 He nucleus formed.

18.6 Nuclear Fission and Nuclear Fusion

859

The corresponding energy change can be calculated from
¢E  ¢mc2
where
kg
amu
amu
b
 a0.0304
ba1.66  1027
amu
nucleus
nucleus
kg
 5.04  1029
nucleus

¢m  0.0304

c  3.00  108 m/s

and
Thus

kg
m 2
ba3.00  108 b
s
nucleus
12
 4.54  10 J/nucleus

¢E  a5.04  1029

This means that 4.54  1012 J of energy is released per nucleus formed and that 4.54 
1012 J would be required to decompose the nucleus into the constituent neutrons and
protons. Thus the binding energy (BE) per nucleon is
4.54  1012 J/nucleus
4 nucleons/nucleus
 1.14  1012 J/nucleon
J
1 MeV
 a1.14  1012
b
ba
nucleon 1.60  1013 J
 7.13 MeV/nucleon

BE per nucleon 

See Exercises 18.38 through 18.40.

18.6

Nuclear Fission and Nuclear Fusion

The graph shown in Fig. 18.9 has very important implications for the use of nuclear
processes as sources of energy. Recall that energy is released, that is, ¢E is negative, when
a process goes from a less stable to a more stable state. The higher a nuclide is on the
curve, the more stable it is. This means that two types of nuclear processes will be exothermic (see Fig. 18.10):
1. Combining two light nuclei to form a heavier, more stable nucleus. This process is
called fusion.
2. Splitting a heavy nucleus into two nuclei with smaller mass numbers. This process is
called ﬁssion.
Because of the large binding energies involved in holding the nucleus together, both these
processes involve energy changes more than a million times larger than those associated
with chemical reactions.

Nuclear Fission
Visualization: Nuclear Fission

Nuclear ﬁssion was discovered in the late 1930s when 235
92U nuclides bombarded with neutrons were observed to split into two lighter elements:
1
0n

 235
92 U ¡

141
56 Ba

1
 92
36Kr  3 0 n

860

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

56
26

Binding energy per nucleon (MeV)

9

Fe

8
Fission

7
6
5
4
3
Fusion

2
1

FIGURE 18.10
Both ﬁssion and fusion produce more
stable nuclides and are thus exothermic.

0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260
Mass number (A)

This process, shown schematically in Fig. 18.11, releases 3.5  1011 J of energy per
event, which translates to 2.1  1013 J per mole of 235
92 U. Compare this ﬁgure with that
for the combustion of methane, which releases only 8.0  105 J of energy per mole. The
ﬁssion of 235
92 U produces about 26 million times more energy than the combustion of
methane.
The process shown in Fig. 18.11 is only one of the many ﬁssion reactions that 235
92 U
can undergo. Another is
1
0n

 235
92 U ¡

137
52 Te

1
 97
40Zr  2 0 n

In fact, over 200 different isotopes of 35 different elements have been observed among
the ﬁssion products of 235
92 U.
In addition to the product nuclides, neutrons are produced in the ﬁssion reactions of
235
92 U. This makes it possible to have a self-sustaining ﬁssion process—a chain reaction
(see Fig. 18.12). For the ﬁssion process to be self-sustaining, at least one neutron from
each ﬁssion event must go on to split another nucleus. If, on average, less than one neutron
causes another ﬁssion event, the process dies out and the reaction is said to be subcritical.
If exactly one neutron from each ﬁssion event causes another ﬁssion event, the process
sustains itself at the same level and is said to be critical. If more than one neutron from
each ﬁssion event causes another ﬁssion event, the process rapidly escalates and the heat
buildup causes a violent explosion. This situation is described as supercritical.

92
36 Kr

n
n
n
n

FIGURE 18.11
On capturing a neutron, the 235
92U nucleus
undergoes ﬁssion to produce two lighter
nuclides, free neutrons (typically three),
and a large amount of energy.

235
92U

236
92U

(Unstable nucleus)
141
56 Ba

+ Energy

18.6 Nuclear Fission and Nuclear Fusion

861

Nucleus
Neutron

Two neutrons
from fission

FIGURE 18.12
Representation of a ﬁssion process in which
each event produces two neutrons, which
can go on to split other nuclei, leading to a
self-sustaining chain reaction.

To achieve the critical state, a certain mass of ﬁssionable material, called the critical
mass, is needed. If the sample is too small, too many neutrons escape before they have a
chance to cause a ﬁssion event, and the process stops. This is illustrated in Fig. 18.13.
During World War II, an intense research effort called the Manhattan Project was carried out by the United States to build a bomb based on the principles of nuclear ﬁssion.
This program produced the ﬁssion bombs that were used with devastating effects on the
cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. Basically, a ﬁssion bomb operates by suddenly
combining subcritical masses of ﬁssionable material to form a supercritical mass, thereby
producing an explosion of incredible intensity.

Nuclear Reactors
Because of the tremendous energies involved, it seemed desirable to develop the ﬁssion
process as an energy source to produce electricity. To accomplish this, reactors were designed in which controlled ﬁssion can occur. The resulting energy is used to heat water
to produce steam to run turbine generators, in much the same way that a coal-burning
power plant generates energy. A schematic diagram of a nuclear power plant is shown in
Fig. 18.14.
In the reactor core, shown in Fig. 18.15, uranium that has been enriched to approx235
imately 3% 235
92 U (natural uranium contains only 0.7% 92 U) is housed in cylinders. A
moderator surrounds the cylinders to slow down the neutrons so that the uranium fuel
can capture them more efﬁciently. Control rods, composed of substances that absorb
Small
proportion
of escapes

Large
proportion
of escapes

FIGURE 18.13
If the mass of ﬁssionable material is too
small, most of the neutrons escape before
causing another ﬁssion event, and the
process dies out.

Nucleus
Subcritical mass
(too many neutrons
escape to keep the
reaction sustained)

Supercritical mass
(most released neutrons
interact with nuclides
and the chain
reaction multiplies)

862

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

Containment
shell
Control
rods

Steam

Condenser
(steam from
turbine is
condensed)

Steam
turbine

Electrical
output
Hot coolant

Control rods of
neutron-absorbing
material
Uranium fuel
cylinders
Reactor
Water

Pump
Steam
generator
Pump
Pump

27°C

38°C

Incoming coolant

Large water
source

FIGURE 18.15
A schematic of a reactor core. The position of the control rods determines the
level of energy production by regulating
the amount of ﬁssion taking place.

FIGURE 18.14
A schematic diagram of a nuclear power plant.

neutrons, are used to regulate the power level of the reactor. The reactor is designed so
that should a malfunction occur, the control rods are automatically inserted into the core
to stop the reaction. A liquid (usually water) is circulated through the core to extract the
heat generated by the energy of ﬁssion; the energy can then be passed on via a heat exchanger to water in the turbine system.
Although the concentration of 235
92 U in the fuel elements is not great enough to allow a
supercritical mass to develop in the core, a failure of the cooling system can lead to temperatures high enough to melt the core. As a result, the building housing the core must be designed to contain the core even if meltdown occurs. A great deal of controversy now exists
about the efﬁciency of the safety systems in nuclear power plants. Accidents such as the one
at the Three Mile Island facility in Pennsylvania in 1979 and in Chernobyl,* Ukraine, in 1986
have led to questions about the wisdom of continuing to build ﬁssion-based power plants.

Breeder Reactors
One potential problem facing the nuclear power industry is the supply of 235
92 U. Some scientists have suggested that we have nearly depleted those uranium deposits rich enough
in 235
92 U to make production of ﬁssionable fuel economically feasible. Because of this
possibility, breeder reactors have been developed, in which ﬁssionable fuel is actually
produced while the reactor runs. In the breeder reactors now being studied, the major
239
component of natural uranium, nonﬁssionable 238
92 U, is changed to ﬁssionable 94Pu. The
reaction involves absorption of a neutron, followed by production of two ␤ particles:
1
0n

Uranium oxide (reﬁned uranium).

 238
92 U ¡
239
92 U ¡
239
93 Np ¡

239
92 U
239
93 Np
239
94 Pu

 10 e
 10 e

*See C. A. Atwood, “Chernobyl—What happened?” J. Chem. Ed. 65 (1988): 1037.

18.7 Effects of Radiation
Electrostatic
repulsion
0
Distance between
the particles

E

Energy of attraction
due to the strong
nuclear force

863

238
As the reactor runs and 235
92 U is split, some of the excess neutrons are absorbed by 92 U to
239
239
produce 94Pu. The 94Pu is then separated out and used to fuel another reactor. Such a
reactor thus “breeds” nuclear fuel as it operates.
Although breeder reactors are now used in France, the United States is proceeding
slowly with their development because of their controversial nature. One problem involves
the hazards in handling plutonium, which ﬂames on contact with air and is very toxic.

Fusion
Large quantities of energy are also produced by the fusion of two light nuclei. In fact,
stars produce their energy through nuclear fusion. Our sun, which presently consists of
73% hydrogen, 26% helium, and 1% other elements, gives off vast quantities of energy
from the fusion of protons to form helium:

FIGURE 18.16
A plot of energy versus the separation
distance for two 21H nuclei. The nuclei
must have sufﬁcient velocities to get over
the electrostatic repulsion “hill” and get
close enough for the nuclear binding
forces to become effective, thus “fusing”
the particles into a new nucleus and releasing large quantities of energy. The
binding force is at least 100 times the
electrostatic repulsion.

Visualization: Nuclear Fusion

 11H
 21H
3
3
2He  2He
3
1
2He  1H
1
1H
1
1H

Intense research is under way to develop a feasible fusion process because of the
ready availability of many light nuclides (deuterium, 21H, in seawater, for example) that
can serve as fuel in fusion reactors. The major stumbling block is that high temperatures
are required to initiate fusion. The forces that bind nucleons together to form a nucleus
are effective only at very small distances (1013 cm). Thus, for two protons to bind together and thereby release energy, they must get very close together. But protons, because
they are identically charged, repel each other electrostatically. This means that to get two
protons (or two deuterons) close enough to bind together (the nuclear binding force is not
electrostatic), they must be “shot” at each other at speeds high enough to overcome the
electrostatic repulsion.
The electrostatic repulsion forces between two 21 H nuclei are so great that a temperature of 4  107 K is required to give them velocities large enough to cause them
to collide with sufﬁcient energy that the nuclear forces can bind the particles together
and thus release the binding energy. This situation is represented in Fig. 18.16.
Currently, scientists are studying two types of systems to produce the extremely
high temperatures required: high-powered lasers and heating by electric currents. At
present, many technical problems remain to be solved, and it is not clear which method
will prove more useful or when fusion might become a practical energy source.
However, there is still hope that fusion will be a major energy source sometime in the
future.

18.7

The ozone layer is discussed in
Section 20.5.

¡ 21H  01e
¡ 32He
¡ 42He  2 11H
¡ 42He  01e

Effects of Radiation

Everyone knows that being hit by a train is very serious. The problem is the energy transfer involved. In fact, any source of energy is potentially harmful to organisms. Energy
transferred to cells can break chemical bonds and cause malfunctioning of the cell systems.
This fact is behind the concern about the ozone layer in the earth’s upper atmosphere,
which screens out high-energy ultraviolet radiation from the sun. Radioactive elements,
which are sources of high-energy particles, are also potentially hazardous, although the
effects are usually quite subtle. The reason for the subtlety of radiation damage is that
even though high-energy particles are involved, the quantity of energy actually deposited
in tissues per event is quite small. However, the resulting damage is no less real, although
the effects may not be apparent for years.

864

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Nuclear Physics: An Introduction
uclear physics is concerned with the fundamental nature
of matter. The central focuses of this area of study are
the relationship between a quantity of energy and its mass,
given by E  mc2, and the fact that matter can be converted
from one form (energy) to another (particulate) in particle
accelerators. Collisions between high-speed particles have
produced a dazzling array of new particles—hundreds of
them. These events can best be interpreted as conversions of
kinetic energy into particles. For example, a collision of sufﬁcient energy between a proton and a neutron can produce
four particles: two protons, one antiproton, and a neutron:

N

1
1H

 10n ¡ 2 11H 

1
1H

 10n

where 11 H is the symbol for an antiproton, which has the
same mass as a proton but the opposite charge. This process
is a little like throwing one baseball at a very high speed
into another and having the energy of the collision converted
into two additional baseballs.
The results of such accelerator experiments have led scientists to postulate the existence of three types of forces important in the nucleus: the strong force, the weak force, and
the electromagnetic force. Along with the gravitational
force, these forces are thought to account for all types of interactions found in matter. These forces are believed to be
generated by the exchange of particles between the interacting pieces of matter. For example, gravitational forces are

thought to be carried by particles called gravitons. The electromagnetic force (the classical electrostatic force between
charged particles) is assumed to be exerted through the exchange of photons. The strong force, not charge-related and
effective only at very short distances (1013 cm), is postulated to involve the exchange of particles called gluons.
The weak force is 100 times weaker than the strong force
and seems to be exerted through the exchange of two types
of large particles, the W (has a mass 70 times the proton
mass) and the Z (has a mass 90 times the proton mass).
The particles discovered have been classiﬁed into several categories. Three of the most important classes are as
follows:
1. Hadrons are particles that respond to the strong force
and have internal structure.
2. Leptons are particles that do not respond to the strong
force and have no internal structure.
3. Quarks are particles with no internal structure that are
thought to be the fundamental constituents of hadrons.
Neutrons and protons are hadrons that are thought to be
composed of three quarks each.
The world of particle physics appears mysterious and
complicated. For example, particle physicists have discovered new properties of matter they call “color,” “charm,”

Radiation damage to organisms can be classiﬁed as somatic or genetic damage.
Somatic damage is damage to the organism itself, resulting in sickness or death. The
effects may appear almost immediately if a massive dose of radiation is received; for
smaller doses, damage may appear years later, usually in the form of cancer. Genetic
damage is damage to the genetic machinery, which produces malfunctions in the offspring
of the organism.
The biologic effects of a particular source of radiation depend on several factors:
1. The energy of the radiation. The higher the energy content of the radiation, the more
damage it can cause. Radiation doses are measured in rads (which is short for radiation absorbed dose), where 1 rad corresponds to 102 J of energy deposited per kilogram of tissue.
2. The penetrating ability of the radiation. The particles and rays produced in radioactive processes vary in their abilities to penetrate human tissue: ␥ rays are highly penetrating, ␤ particles can penetrate approximately 1 cm, and ␣ particles are stopped
by the skin.
3. The ionizing ability of the radiation. Extraction of electrons from biomolecules to
form ions is particularly detrimental to their functions. The ionizing ability of radiation

18.7 Effects of Radiation

and “strangeness” and have postulated conservation laws
involving these properties. This area of science is extremely important because it should help us to understand
the interactions of matter in a more elegant and uniﬁed
way. For example, the classiﬁcation of force into four categories is probably necessary only because we do not understand the true nature of forces. All forces may be special cases of a single, all-pervading force ﬁeld that governs
all of nature. In fact, Einstein spent the last 30 years of his

865

life looking for a way to unify the gravitational and
electromagnetic forces—without success. Physicists may
now be on the verge of accomplishing what Einstein failed
to do.
Although the practical aspects of the work in nuclear
physics are not yet totally apparent, a more fundamental understanding of the way nature operates could lead to
presently undreamed-of devices for energy production and
communication, which could revolutionize our lives.

(left) An aerial view of Fermilab, a high-energy particle accelerator in Batavia, Illinois.
(right) The accelerator tunnel at Fermilab.

varies dramatically. For example, ␥ rays penetrate very deeply but cause only occasional ionization. On the other hand, ␣ particles, although not very penetrating, are
very effective at causing ionization and produce a dense trail of damage. Thus ingestion of an ␣-particle producer, such as plutonium, is particularly damaging.
4. The chemical properties of the radiation source. When a radioactive nuclide is ingested into the body, its effectiveness in causing damage depends on its residence
90
time. For example, 85
36Kr and 38Sr are both ␤-particle producers. However, since krypton is chemically inert, it passes through the body quickly and does not have much
time to do damage. Strontium, being chemically similar to calcium, can collect in
bones, where it may cause leukemia and bone cancer.
Because of the differences in the behavior of the particles and rays produced by
radioactive decay, both the energy dose of the radiation and its effectiveness in causing
biologic damage must be taken into account. The rem (which is short for roentgen equivalent for man) is deﬁned as follows:
Number of rems  1number of rads2  RBE
where RBE represents the relative effectiveness of the radiation in causing biologic damage.

866

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

TABLE 18.6

Effects of Short-Term Exposures to Radiation

Dose (rem)

Clinical Effect

0–25
25–50
100–200
500

Exposure
(millirems/year)
Cosmic radiation
From the earth
From building
materials
In human tissues
Inhalation of air
Total from natural
sources
X-ray diagnosis
Radiotherapy
Internal diagnosis/
therapy
Nuclear power industry
TV tubes, industrial
wastes, etc.
Radioactive fallout
Total from human
activities
Total

50
47
3
21
5

126
50
10
1
0.2
2
4

67
193

FIGURE 18.17
The two models for radiation damage. In
the linear model, even a small dosage
causes a proportional risk. In the threshold
model, risk begins only after a certain
dosage.

Table 18.6 shows the physical effects of short-term exposure to various doses of radiation, and Table 18.7 gives the sources and amounts of radiation exposure for a typical
person in the United States. Note that natural sources contribute about twice as much as
human activities to the total exposure. However, although the nuclear industry contributes
only a small percentage of the total exposure, the major controversy associated with nuclear power plants is the potential for radiation hazards. These arise mainly from two
sources: accidents allowing the release of radioactive materials and improper disposal of
the radioactive products in spent fuel elements. The radioactive products of the ﬁssion of
235
92 U, although only a small percentage of the total products, have half-lives of several
hundred years and remain dangerous for a long time. Various schemes have been advanced
for the disposal of these wastes. The one that seems to hold the most promise is the incorporation of the wastes into ceramic blocks and the burial of these blocks in geologically stable formations. At present, however, no disposal method has been accepted, and
nuclear wastes continue to accumulate in temporary storage facilities.
Even if a satisfactory method for permanent disposal of nuclear wastes is found, there
will continue to be concern about the effects of exposure to low levels of radiation. Exposure is inevitable from natural sources such as cosmic rays and radioactive minerals,
and many people are also exposed to low levels of radiation from reactors, radioactive
tracers, or diagnostic X rays. Currently, we have little reliable information on the longterm effects of low-level exposure to radiation.
Two models of radiation damage, illustrated in Fig. 18.17, have been proposed: the
linear model and the threshold model. The linear model postulates that damage from radiation is proportional to the dose, even at low levels of exposure. Thus any exposure is
dangerous. The threshold model, on the other hand, assumes that no signiﬁcant damage
occurs below a certain exposure, called the threshold exposure. Note that if the linear
model is correct, radiation exposure should be limited to a bare minimum (ideally at the
natural levels). If the threshold model is correct, a certain level of radiation exposure beyond natural levels can be tolerated. Most scientists feel that since there is little evidence
available to evaluate these models, it is safest to assume that the linear hypothesis is correct and to minimize radiation exposure.

Radiation damage in humans

TABLE 18.7 Typical Radiation
Exposures for a Person Living in
the United States (1 millirem 
103 rem)

Nondetectable
Temporary decrease in white blood cell counts
Strong decrease in white blood cell counts
Death of half the exposed population within 30 days after exposure

0

Linear
model
Threshold
model
Threshold
dosage
Exposure level

For Review

Key Terms
neutron
proton
nucleon
atomic number
mass number
isotopes
nuclide

Section 18.1
thermodynamic stability
kinetic stability
radioactive decay
beta (b) particle
zone of stability
alpha (a) particle
a-particle production
spontaneous ﬁssion
b-particle production
gamma (g) ray
positron production
electron capture
decay series

Section 18.2
rate of decay
half-life

Section 18.3
nuclear transformation
particle accelerator
cyclotron
linear accelerator
transuranium elements

Section 18.4
Geiger–Müller counter (Geiger counter)
scintillation counter
radiocarbon dating (carbon-14 dating)
radiotracers

867

For Review
Radioactivity
䊉 Certain nuclei decay spontaneously into more stable nuclei
䊉 Types of radioactive decay:
• a-particle ( 42He) production
0
• b-particle (1e) production
0
• Positron ( 1e) production
• g rays are usually produced in a radioactive decay event
䊉 A decay series involves several radioactive decays to ﬁnally reach a stable nuclide
䊉 Radioactive decay follows ﬁrst-order kinetics
• Half-life of a radioactive sample: the time required for half of the nuclides to
decay
䊉 The transuranium elements (those beyond uranium in the periodic table) can be
synthesized by particle bombardment of uranium or heavier elements
14
12
䊉 Radiocarbon dating employs the 6C 6C ratio in an object to establish its date of
origin
Thermodynamic stability of a nucleus
䊉 Compares the mass of a nucleus to the sum of the masses of its component nucleons
䊉 When a system gains or loses energy, it also gains or loses mass as described by
the relationship E  mc2
䊉 The difference between the sum of the masses of the component nucleons and the
actual mass of a nucleus (called the mass defect) can be used to calculate the nuclear binding energy
Nuclear energy production
Fusion: the process of combining two light nuclei to form a heavier, more stable
nucleus
䊉 Fission: the process of splitting a heavy nucleus into two lighter, more stable nuclei
• Current nuclear power reactors employ controlled ﬁssion to produce energy
䊉

mass defect
binding energy

Radiation damage
Radiation can cause direct (somatic) damage to a living organism or genetic
damage to the organism’s offspring
䊉 The biologic effects of radiation depend on the energy, the penetrating ability, the
ionizing ability of the radiation, and the chemical properties of the nuclide
producing the radiation

Section 18.6

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Section 18.5

fusion
ﬁssion
chain reaction
subcritical reaction
critical reaction
supercritical reaction
critical mass
reactor core
moderator
control rods
breeder reactor

Section 18.7
somatic damage
genetic damage
rad
rem

䊉

1. Deﬁne or illustrate the following terms:
a. thermodynamic stability
b. kinetic stability
c. radioactive decay
d. beta-particle production
e. alpha-particle production
f. positron production
g. electron capture
h. gamma-ray emissions
In radioactive decay processes, A and Z are conserved. What does this mean?
2. Figure 18.1 illustrates the zone of stability. What is the zone of stability? Stable
light nuclides have about equal numbers of neutrons and protons. What happens
to the neutron-to-proton ratio for stable nuclides as the number of protons

868

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

increases? Nuclides that are not already in the zone of stability undergo radioactive processes to get to the zone of stability. If a nuclide has too many
neutrons, which process(es) can the nuclide undergo to become more stable?
Answer the same question for a nuclide having too many protons.
All radioactive decay processes follow ﬁrst-order kinetics. What does this mean?
What happens to the rate of radioactive decay as the number of nuclides is
halved? Write the ﬁrst-order rate law and the integrated ﬁrst-order rate law.
Deﬁne the terms in each equation. What is the half-life equation for radioactive
decay processes? How does the half-life depend on how many nuclides are present? Are the half-life and rate constant k directly related or inversely related?
What is a nuclear transformation? How do you balance nuclear transformation
reactions? Particle accelerators are used to perform nuclear transformations.
What is a particle accelerator?
What is a Geiger counter and how does it work? What is a scintillation counter
and how does it work? Radiotracers are used in the medical sciences to learn
about metabolic pathways. What are radiotracers? Explain why 14C and 32P
radioactive nuclides would be very helpful in learning about metabolic pathways.
Why is I-131 useful for diagnosis of diseases of the thyroid? How could you use a
radioactive nuclide to demonstrate that chemical equilibrium is a dynamic process?
Explain the theory behind carbon-14 dating. What assumptions must be made
and what problems arise when using carbon-14 dating?
The decay of uranium-238 to lead-206 is also used to estimate the age of
objects. Speciﬁcally, 206Pb-to-238U ratios allow dating of rocks. Why is the 238U
decay to 206Pb useful for dating rocks but worthless for dating objects 10,000
years old or younger? Similarly, why is carbon-14 dating useful for dating
objects 10,000 years old or younger but worthless for dating rocks?
Deﬁne mass defect and binding energy. How do you determine the mass defect
for a nuclide? How do you convert the mass defect into the binding energy for
a nuclide? Iron-56 has the largest binding energy per nucleon among all known
nuclides. Is this good or bad for iron-56? Explain.
Deﬁne ﬁssion and fusion. How does the energy associated with ﬁssion or fusion
processes compare to the energy changes associated with chemical reactions?
Fusion processes are more likely to occur for lighter elements, whereas ﬁssion
processes are more likely to occur for heavier elements. Why? (Hint: Reference
Figure 18.10.) The major stumbling block for turning fusion reactions into a
feasible source of power is the high temperature required to initiate a fusion reaction. Why are elevated temperatures necessary to initiate fusion reactions but
not ﬁssion reactions?
The ﬁssion of U-235 is used exclusively in nuclear power plants located in the
United States. There are many different ﬁssion reactions of U-235, but all the
ﬁssion reactions are self-sustaining chain reactions. Explain. Differentiate
between the terms critical, subcritical, and supercritical. What is the critical
mass? How does a nuclear power plant produce electricity? What are the
purposes of the moderator and the control rods in a ﬁssion reactor? What are
some problems associated with nuclear reactors? What are breeder reactors?
What are some problems associated with breeder reactors?
The biological effects of a particular source of radiation depend on several factors.
List some of these factors. Even though 85Kr and 90Sr are both beta-particle emitters, the dangers associated with the decay of 90Sr are much greater than those
linked to 85Kr. Why? Although gamma rays are far more penetrating than alpha
particles, the latter are more likely to cause damage to an organism. Why? Which
type of radiation is more effective at promoting the ionization of biomolecules?

Exercises

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
1. When nuclei undergo nuclear transformations, g rays of characteristic frequencies are observed. How does this fact, along with
other information in the chapter on nuclear stability, suggest that
a quantum mechanical model may apply to the nucleus?
2. There is a trend in the United States toward using coal-ﬁred power
plants to generate electricity rather than building new nuclear ﬁssion
power plants. Is the use of coal-ﬁred power plants without risk? Make
a list of the risks to society from the use of each type of power plant.
3. Which type of radioactive decay has the net effect of changing a
neutron into a proton? Which type of decay has the net effect of
turning a proton into a neutron?
4. What is annihilation in terms of nuclear processes?
5. What are transuranium elements and how are they synthesized?
6. Scientists have estimated that the earth’s crust was formed 4.3 billion years ago. The radioactive nuclide 176Lu, which decays to 176Hf,
was used to estimate this age. The half-life of 176Lu is 37 billion
years. How are ratios of 176Lu to 176Hf utilized to date very old rocks?
7. Why are the observed energy changes for nuclear processes so much
larger than the energy changes for chemical and physical processes?
8. Natural uranium is mostly nonﬁssionable 238U; it contains only about
0.7% of ﬁssionable 235U. For uranium to be useful as a nuclear fuel,
the relative amount of 235U must be increased to about 3%. This is
accomplished through a gas diffusion process. In the diffusion
process, natural uranium reacts with ﬂuorine to form a mixture of
238
UF 6(g) and 235UF6(g). The ﬂuoride mixture is then enriched
through a multistage diffusion process to produce a 3% 235U nuclear
fuel. The diffusion process utilizes Graham’s law of effusion (see
Chapter 5, Section 5.7). Explain how Graham’s law of effusion allows natural uranium to be enriched by the gaseous diffusion process.
9. Strontium-90 and radon-222 both pose serious health risks. 90Sr
decays by ␤-particle production and has a relatively long half-life
(28.8 yr). Radon-222 decays by alpha-particle production and has
a relatively short half-life (3.82 days). Explain why each decay
process poses health risks.
10. A recent study concluded that any amount of radiation exposure
can cause biological damage. Explain the differences between the
two models of radiation damage, the linear model and the threshold model.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Radioactive Decay and Nuclear Transformations
11. Write balanced equations for each of the processes described
below.
a. Chromium-51, which targets the spleen and is used as a tracer
in studies of red blood cells, decays by electron capture.

869

b. Iodine-131, used to treat hyperactive thyroid glands, decays by
producing a b particle.
12. Write balanced equations for each of the processes described
below.
a. Phosphorus-32, which accumulates in the liver, decays by
b-particle production.
b. Uranium-235, which is used in atomic bombs, decays initially
by a-particle production.
13. Write an equation describing the radioactive decay of each of the
following nuclides. (The particle produced is shown in parentheses, except for electron capture, where an electron is a reactant.)
a. 68Ga (electron capture)
c. 212Fr (␣)
62
b. Cu (positron)
d. 129Sb (␤)
14. In each of the following nuclear reactions, supply the missing particle.
a. 73Ga S 73Ge  ?
c. 205Bi S 205Pb  ?
b. 192 Pt S 188Os  ?
d. 241Cm  ? S 241Am
15. The radioactive isotope 247Bk decays by a series of a-particle and
b-particle productions, taking 247Bk through many transformations
to end up as 207Pb. In the complete decay series, how many ␣ particles and b particles are produced?
16. One type of commercial smoke detector contains a minute amount
of radioactive americium-241 (241Am), which decays by a-particle production. The ␣ particles ionize molecules in the air, allowing it to conduct an electric current. When smoke particles enter, the conductivity of the air is changed and the alarm buzzes.
a. Write the equation for the decay of 241
95Am by ␣-particle
production.
b. The complete decay of 241Am involves successively ␣, ␣, ␤,
␣, ␣, ␤, ␣, ␣, ␣, ␤, ␣, and ␤ production. What is the ﬁnal stable nucleus produced in this decay series?
c. Identify the 11 intermediate nuclides.
17. There are four stable isotopes of iron with mass numbers 54, 56, 57,
and 58. There are also two radioactive isotopes: iron-53 and iron59. Predict modes of decay for these two isotopes. (See Table 18.2.)
18. The only stable isotope of ﬂuorine is ﬂuorine-19. Predict possible modes of decay for ﬂuorine-21, ﬂuorine-18, and ﬂuorine-17.
19. In 1994 it was proposed (and eventually accepted) that element
106 be named seaborgium, Sg, in honor of Glenn T. Seaborg, discoverer of the transuranium elements.
a. 263Sg was produced by the bombardment of 249Cf with a beam
of 18O nuclei. Complete and balance an equation for this
reaction.
b. 263Sg decays by ␣ emission. What is the other product resulting from the ␣ decay of 263Sg?
20. Many elements have been synthesized by bombarding relatively
heavy atoms with high-energy particles in particle accelerators.
Complete the following nuclear reactions, which have been used
to synthesize elements.
1
a. ________  42He S 243
97 Bk  0 n
238
12
b. 92U  6 C S ________  6 10 n
260
1
c. 249
98 Cf  ________ S 105 Db  4 0 n
249
10
257
d. 98Cf  5 B S 103 Lr  ________

870

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

Kinetics of Radioactive Decay
21. The rate constant for a certain radioactive nuclide is 1.0 
103 h1. What is the half-life of this nuclide?
22. Americium-241 is widely used in smoke detectors. The radiation
released by this element ionizes particles that are then detected
by a charged-particle collector. The half-life of 241Am is 432.2
years, and it decays by emitting alpha particles. How many alpha
particles are emitted each second by a 5.00-g sample of 241Am?
23. Krypton consists of several radioactive isotopes, some of which
are listed in the following table.
Half-life
Kr-73
Kr-74
Kr-76
Kr-81

27 s
11.5 min
14.8 h
2.1  105 yr

Which of these isotopes is most stable and which isotope is
“hottest”? How long does it take for 87.5% of each isotope to decay?
24. Radioactive copper-64 decays with a half-life of 12.8 days.
a. What is the value of k in s1?
b. A sample contains 28.0 mg 64Cu. How many decay events will
be produced in the ﬁrst second? Assume the atomic mass of
64
Cu is 64.0.
c. A chemist obtains a fresh sample of 64Cu and measures its radioactivity. She then determines that to do an experiment, the
radioactivity cannot fall below 25% of the initial measured
value. How long does she have to do the experiment?
25. Phosphorus-32 is a commonly used radioactive nuclide in biochemical research, particularly in studies of nucleic acids. The
half-life of phosphorus-32 is 14.3 days. What mass of phosphorus-32 is left from an original sample of 175 mg of Na332PO4 after
35.0 days? Assume the atomic mass of 32P is 32.0.
26. The curie (Ci) is a commonly used unit for measuring nuclear
radioactivity: 1 curie of radiation is equal to 3.7  1010 decay
events per second (the number of decay events from 1 g of radium
in 1 s).
a. What mass of Na238SO4 has an activity of 10.0 mCi? Sulfur38 has an atomic mass of 38.0 and a half-life of 2.87 h.
b. How long does it take for 99.99% of a sample of sulfur-38 to
decay?
27. The ﬁrst atomic explosion was detonated in the desert north of
Alamogordo, New Mexico, on July 16, 1945. What fraction of the
strontium-90 (t1 2  28.8 years) originally produced by that explosion still remains as of July 16, 2006?
28. Iodine-131 is used in the diagnosis and treatment of thyroid disease and has a half-life of 8.1 days. If a patient with thyroid disease consumes a sample of Na131I containing 10 mg of 131I, how
long will it take for the amount of 131I to decrease to 1 100 of the
original amount?
29. The Br-82 nucleus has a half-life of 1.0  103 min. If you
wanted 1.0 g of Br-82 and the delivery time was 3.0 days, what

mass of NaBr should you order (assuming all of the Br in the
NaBr was Br-82)?
30. Fresh rainwater or surface water contains enough tritium (31H) to
show 5.5 decay events per minute per 100. g of water. Tritium has
a half-life of 12.3 years. You are asked to check a vintage wine
that is claimed to have been produced in 1946. How many decay
events per minute should you expect to observe in 100. g of that
wine?
31. A living plant contains approximately the same fraction of carbon14 as in atmospheric carbon dioxide. Assuming that the observed
rate of decay of carbon-14 from a living plant is 13.6 counts per
minute per gram of carbon, how many counts per minute per gram
of carbon will be measured from a 15,000-year-old sample? Will
radiocarbon dating work well for small samples of 10 mg or less?
(For14C, t1 2  5730 years.)
32. Assume a constant 14C 12C ratio of 13.6 counts per minute per
gram of living matter. A sample of a petriﬁed tree was found to
give 1.2 counts per minute per gram. How old is the tree?
(t1 2  14C  5730 years.)
33. A rock contains 0.688 mg of 206Pb for every 1.000 mg of 238U
present. Assuming that no lead was originally present, that all the
206
Pb formed over the years has remained in the rock, and that the
number of nuclides in intermediate stages of decay between 238U
and 206Pb is negligible, calculate the age of the rock. (For 238U,
t1 2  4.5  109 years.)
34. The mass ratios of 40Ar to 40K also can be used to date geologic
materials. Potassium-40 decays by two processes:
40
19 K
40
19 K



40
0
 1e 88n 18Ar
88n 4200Ca  01e
40

(10.7%)

t12  1.27  109 years

(89.3%)

40

a. Why are Ar K ratios used to date materials rather than
40
Ca40K ratios?
b. What assumptions must be made using this technique?
c. A sedimentary rock has an 40Ar40K ratio of 0.95. Calculate
the age of the rock.
d. How will the measured age of a rock compare to the actual
age if some 40Ar escaped from the sample?

Energy Changes in Nuclear Reactions
35. The sun radiates 3.9  1023 J of energy into space every second.
What is the rate at which mass is lost from the sun?
36. The earth receives 1.8  1014 kJ/s of solar energy. What mass
of solar material is converted to energy over a 24-h period to
provide the daily amount of solar energy to the earth? What
mass of coal would have to be burned to provide the same
amount of energy? (Coal releases 32 kJ of energy per gram
when burned.)
37. Many transuranium elements, such as plutonium-232, have very
short half-lives. (For 232Pu, the half-life is 36 minutes.) However,
some, like protactinium-231 1half-life  3.34  104 years2, have
relatively long half-lives. Use the masses given in the following
table to calculate the change in energy when 1 mol of 232Pu nuclei and 1 mol of 231Pa nuclei are each formed from their respective number of protons and neutrons.

Additional Exercises

Atom or
Particle

46. When using a Geiger–Müller counter to measure radioactivity, it
is necessary to maintain the same geometrical orientation between
the sample and the Geiger–Müller tube to compare different measurements. Why?

Atomic
Mass

Neutron
Proton
Electron
Pu-232
Pa-231

1.67493
1.67262
9.10939
3.85285
3.83616







1024
1024
1028
1022
1022

g
g
g
g
g

47. Photosynthesis in plants can be represented by the following
overall reaction:
6CO2 1g2  6H2O1l2 ¡ C6H12O6 1s2  6O2 1g2
Light

(Since the masses of 232Pu and 231Pa are atomic masses, they each
include the mass of the electrons present. The mass of the nucleus
will be the atomic mass minus the mass of the electrons.)
38. The most stable nucleus in terms of binding energy per nucleon
is 56Fe. If the atomic mass of 56Fe is 55.9349 amu, calculate the
binding energy per nucleon for 56Fe.
39. Calculate the binding energy in J/nucleon for carbon-12 (atomic
mass 12.0000) and uranium-235 (atomic mass 235.0439). The
atomic mass of 11H is 1.00782 amu and the mass of a neutron is
1.00866 amu. The most stable nucleus known is 56Fe (see Exercise 38). Would the binding energy per nucleon for 56Fe be larger
or smaller than that of 12C or 235U? Explain.
40. Calculate the binding energy per nucleon for 21H and 31H. The
atomic masses are 21H, 2.01410, and 31H, 3.01605.
41. The mass defect for a Li-6 nucleus is 0.03434 g/mol. Calculate
the atomic mass of Li-6.
42. The binding energy per nucleon for Mg-27 is 1.326  1012
J/nucleon. Calculate the atomic mass of Mg-27.
43. Calculate the amount of energy released per gram of hydrogen nuclei
reacted for the following reaction. The atomic masses are 11H, 1.00782
amu, 12H, 2.01410 amu, and an electron, 5.4858  104 amu. (Hint:
Think carefully about how to account for the electron mass.)
1
1H



1
1H

¡

2
1H



0
1e

44. The easiest fusion reaction to initiate is
2
1H

871

 31H ¡ 42He  01n

Calculate the energy released per 42He nucleus produced and per
mole of 42He produced. The atomic masses are 21H, 2.01410; 31H,
3.01605; and 42He, 4.00260. The masses of the electron and neutron are 5.4858  104 and 1.00866 amu, respectively.

Detection, Uses, and Health Effects of Radiation
45. The typical response of a Geiger–Müller tube is shown below.
Explain the shape of this curve.

Algae grown in water containing some 18O (in H218O) evolve oxygen gas with the same isotopic composition as the oxygen in the
water. When algae growing in water containing only 16O were furnished carbon dioxide containing 18O, no 18O was found to be
evolved from the oxygen gas produced. What conclusions about
photosynthesis can be drawn from these experiments?
48. Consider the following reaction to produce methyl acetate:
O
O


CH3OH  CH3COH 8n CH3COCH3  H2O
Methyl
acetate

When this reaction is carried out with CH3OH containing oxygen18, the water produced does not contain oxygen-18. Explain.
49. U-235 undergoes many different ﬁssion reactions. For one such
reaction, when U-235 is struck with a neutron, Ce-144 and Sr-90
are produced along with some neutrons and electrons. How many
neutrons and ␤-particles are produced in this ﬁssion reaction?
50. Breeder reactors are used to convert the nonﬁssionable nuclide
238
238
092U to a ﬁssionable product. Neutron capture of the 092U is followed by two successive beta decays. What is the ﬁnal ﬁssionable
product?
51. Which do you think would be the greater health hazard: the release of a radioactive nuclide of Sr or a radioactive nuclide of Xe
into the environment? Assume the amount of radioactivity is the
same in each case. Explain your answer on the basis of the chemical properties of Sr and Xe. Why are the chemical properties of
a radioactive substance important in assessing its potential health
hazards?
52. Consider the following information:
i. The layer of dead skin on our bodies is sufﬁcient to protect
us from most ␣-particle radiation.
ii. Plutonium is an ␣-particle producer.
iii. The chemistry of Pu4 is similar to that of Fe3.
iv. Pu oxidizes readily to Pu4.
Why is plutonium one of the most toxic substances known?

Counts/s

Additional Exercises

Disintegrations/s from sample

53. Predict whether each of the following nuclides is stable or unstable (radioactive). If the nuclide is unstable, predict the type of
radioactivity you would expect it to exhibit.
a. 45
b. 56
c. 20
d. 194
19K
26Fe
11Na
81Tl
54. At a ﬂea market, you’ve found a very interesting painting done in
the style of Rembrandt’s “dark period” (1642–1672). You suspect
that you really do not have a genuine Rembrandt, but you take it
to the local university for testing. Living wood shows a carbon-14

872

55.
56.

57.

58.

Chapter Eighteen The Nucleus: A Chemist’s View

activity of 15.3 counts per minute per gram. Your painting showed
a carbon-14 activity of 15.1 counts per minute per gram. Could
it be a genuine Rembrandt?
Deﬁne “third-life” in a similar way to “half-life” and determine
the “third-life” for a nuclide that has a half-life of 31.4 years.
A proposed system for storing nuclear wastes involves storing the
radioactive material in caves or deep mine shafts. One of the most
toxic nuclides that must be disposed of is plutonium-239, which
is produced in breeder reactors and has a half-life of 24,100 years.
A suitable storage place must be geologically stable long enough
for the activity of plutonium-239 to decrease to 0.1% of its original value. How long is this for plutonium-239?
During World War II, tritium (3H) was a component of ﬂuorescent watch dials and hands. Assume you have such a watch that
was made in January 1944. If 17% or more of the original tritium
was needed to read the dial in dark places, until what year could
you read the time at night? (For 3H, t1 2  12.3 yr.)
A positron and an electron can annihilate each other on colliding,
producing energy as photons:
0
1e



0
1e

¡ 2 00g

Assuming that both g rays have the same energy, calculate the
wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation produced.
59. A small atomic bomb releases energy equivalent to the detonation of 20,000 tons of TNT; a ton of TNT releases 4  109 J of
energy when exploded. Using 2  1013 J/mol as the energy released by ﬁssion of 235U, approximately what mass of 235U undergoes ﬁssion in this atomic bomb?
60. During the research that led to production of the two atomic
bombs used against Japan in World War II, different mechanisms
for obtaining a supercritical mass of ﬁssionable material were investigated. In one type of bomb, a “gun” shot one piece of ﬁssionable material into a cavity containing another piece of ﬁssionable material. In the second type of bomb, the ﬁssionable
material was surrounded with a high explosive that, when detonated, compressed the ﬁssionable material into a smaller volume.
Discuss what is meant by critical mass, and explain why the ability to achieve a critical mass is essential to sustaining a nuclear
reaction.
61. Using the kinetic molecular theory (Section 5.6), calculate the root
mean square velocity and the average kinetic energy of 21H nuclei
at a temperature of 4  107 K. (See Exercise 44 for the appropriate mass values.)

Challenge Problems
62. A 0.20-mL sample of a solution containing 31H that produces
3.7  103 cps is injected into the bloodstream of an animal. After allowing circulatory equilibrium to be established, a 0.20-mL
sample of blood is found to have an activity of 20. cps. Calculate
the blood volume of the animal.
63. A 0.10-cm3 sample of a solution containing a radioactive nuclide
(5.0  103 counts per minute per milliliter) is injected into a rat.
Several minutes later 1.0 cm3 of blood is removed. The blood
shows 48 counts per minute of radioactivity. Calculate the volume of blood in the rat. What assumptions must be made in performing this calculation?

64. Zirconium is one of the few metals that retains its structural integrity upon exposure to radiation. The fuel rods in most nuclear
reactors therefore are often made of zirconium. Answer the following questions about the redox properties of zirconium based
on the half-reaction
ZrO2  H2O  H2O  4e ¡ Zr  4OH 

e°  2.36 V

a. Is zirconium metal capable of reducing water to form hydrogen gas at standard conditions?
b. Write a balanced equation for the reduction of water by
zirconium.
c. Calculate e°, G°, and K for the reduction of water by zirconium metal.
d. The reduction of water by zirconium occurred during the accidents at Three Mile Island in 1979. The hydrogen produced
was successfully vented and no chemical explosion occurred.
If 1.00  103 kg of Zr reacts, what mass of H2 is produced?
What volume of H2 at 1.0 atm and 1000.°C is produced?
e. At Chernobyl in 1986, hydrogen was produced by the reaction
of superheated steam with the graphite reactor core:
C1s2  H2O1g2 ¡ CO1g2  H2 1g2
It was not possible to prevent a chemical explosion at Chernobyl. In light of this, do you think it was a correct decision
to vent the hydrogen and other radioactive gases into the atmosphere at Three Mile Island? Explain.
65. In addition to the process described in the text, a second process
called the carbon–nitrogen cycle occurs in the sun:
1
1H

1
1H
1
1H

1
1H

Overall
reaction:

 126C ¡




13
7N
13
6C
14
7N
15
8O
15
7N

¡
¡
¡
¡
¡

13
7N
13
6C
14
7N
15
8O
15
7N
12
6C

 00g






0
 1e
0
0g
0
0g
0
 1e
4
2He

 00g

4 11H ¡ 42He  2 10 e

a. What is the catalyst in this process?
b. What nucleons are intermediates?
c. How much energy is released per mole of hydrogen nuclei in
the overall reaction? (The atomic masses of 11H and 42He are
1.00782 and 4.00260, respectively.)
66. The most signiﬁcant source of natural radiation is radon-222.
222
Rn, a decay product of 238U, is continuously generated in the
earth’s crust, allowing gaseous Rn to seep into the basements of
buildings. Because 222Rn is an a-particle producer with a relatively short half-life of 3.82 days, it can cause biological damage
when inhaled.
a. How many a particles and b particles are produced when 238U
decays to 222Rn? What nuclei are produced when 222Rn decays?
b. Radon is a noble gas so one would expect it to pass through
the body quickly. Why is there a concern over inhaling 222Rn?
c. Another problem associated with 222Rn is that the decay
of 222Rn produces a more potent a-particle producer (t1 2 
3.11min) that is a solid. What is the identity of the solid? Give
the balanced equation of this species decaying by a-particle
production. Why is the solid a more potent a-particle producer?

Integrative Problems
d. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recommends that 222Rn levels not exceed 4 pCi per liter of air
(1 Ci  1 curie  3.7  1010 decay events per second; 1 pCi 
1  1012 Ci). Convert 4.0 pCi per liter of air into concentrations units of 222Rn atoms per liter of air and moles of 222Rn
per liter of air.
67. To determine the Ksp value of Hg2I2, a chemist obtained a solid
sample of Hg2I2 in which some of the iodine is present as radioactive 131I. The count rate of the Hg2I2 sample is 5.0  1011
counts per minute per mole of I. An excess amount of Hg2I2(s) is
placed into some water, and the solid is allowed to come to equilibrium with its respective ions. A 150.0-mL sample of the saturated solution is withdrawn and the radioactivity measured at 33
counts per minute. From this information, calculate the Ksp value
for Hg2I2.
Hg2I2 1s2 ∆ Hg22 1aq2  2I 1aq2

Ksp  3Hg22 4 3 I 4 2

68. Estimate the temperature needed to achieve the fusion of deuterium to make an alpha particle. The energy required can be
estimated from Coulomb’s law [use the form E  9.0  109
(Q1Q2 r), using Q  1.6  1019 C for a proton, and r  2 
1015 m for the helium nucleus; the unit for the proportionality
constant in Coloumb’s law is J  m C2.]

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

69. A recently reported synthesis of the transuranium element
bohrium (Bh) involved the bombardment of berkelium-249 with

873

neon-22 to produce bohrium-267. Write a nuclear reaction for this
synthesis. The half-life of bohrium-267 is 15.0 seconds. If 199
atoms of bohrium-267 could be synthesized, how much time
would elapse before only 11 atoms of bohrium-267 remain? What
is the expected electron conﬁguration of elemental bohrium?
70. Radioactive cobalt-60 is used to study defects in vitamin B12 absorption because cobalt is the metallic atom at the center of the
vitamin B12 molecule. The nuclear synthesis of this cobalt isotope
involves a three-step process. The overall reaction is iron-58
reacting with two neutrons to produce cobalt-60 along with the
emission of another particle. What particle is emitted in this
nuclear synthesis? What is the binding energy in J per nucleon for
the cobalt-60 nucleus (atomic masses: 60Co  59.9338 amu;
1
H  1.00782 amu). What is the de Broglie wavelength of the
emitted particle if it has a velocity equal to 0.90c where c is the
speed of light?
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

19

The Representative Elements:
Groups 1A Through 4A

Contents
19.1 A Survey of the
Representative Elements
• Atomic Size and Group
Anomalies
• Abundance and Preparation
19.2 The Group 1A Elements
19.3 Hydrogen
19.4 The Group 2A Elements
19.5 The Group 3A Elements
19.6 The Group 4A Elements

Scanning electron micrograph of calcium crystals, a representative element in Group 2A.

S

o far in this book we have covered the major principles and explored the most important models of chemistry. In particular, we have seen that the chemical properties of
the elements can be explained very successfully by the quantum mechanical model of the
atom. In fact, the most convincing evidence of that model’s validity is its ability to relate
the observed periodic properties of the elements to the number of valence electrons in
their atoms.
We have learned many properties of the elements and their compounds, but we have
not discussed in detail the relationship between the chemical properties of a particular
element and its position on the periodic table. In this chapter and the next we will explore
the chemical similarities and differences among the elements in the several groups of the
periodic table and will try to interpret these data using the quantum mechanical model of
the atom. In the process we will illustrate a great variety of chemical properties and further
demonstrate the practical importance of chemistry.

19.1

A Survey of the Representative Elements

The traditional form of the periodic table is shown in Fig. 19.1. Recall that the representative elements, whose chemical properties are determined by the valence-level s and
p electrons, are designated Groups 1A through 8A. The transition metals, in the center
of the table, result from the ﬁlling of d orbitals. The elements that correspond to the ﬁlling
of the 4f and 5f orbitals are listed separately as the lanthanides and actinides, respectively.
The heavy black line in Fig. 19.1 divides the metals from the nonmetals. Some elements just on either side of this line, such as silicon and germanium, exhibit both metallic and nonmetallic properties and are often called metalloids or semimetals. The
fundamental chemical difference between a metal and a nonmetal is that metals tend to
lose their valence electrons to form cations, usually with the valence-electron conﬁguration of the noble gas from the preceding period, and nonmetals tend to gain electrons to

1A
H

2A

3A

4A

Li

Be

B

C

Na

Mg

Al

Si

K

Ca

Ga

Ge

Rb

Sr

In

Sn

Cs

Ba

Tl

Pb

Fr

Ra

875

876

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A
1A

FIGURE 19.1
The periodic table. The elements in the A
groups are the representative elements. The
elements shown in pink are called transition metals. The dark line approximately divides the nonmetals from the metals. The
elements that have both metallic and nonmetallic properties (semimetals) are shaded
in blue.

Metallic character increases going down
a group in the periodic table.

8A

H

2A

3A

4A

5A

6A

7A

He

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

Ne

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

K

Ca

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

Rb

Sr

Y

Zr

Nb

Mo

Tc

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

Cs

Ba

La

Hf

Ta

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au

Hg

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

Fr

Ra

Ac

Rf

Ha Unh Uns Uno Une Ds

Rg Uub Uut Uuq Uup

Lanthanides

Ce

Pr

Nd

Pm Sm

Eu

Gd

Tb

Dy

Ho

Er

Tm

Yb

Lu

Actinides

Th

Pa

U

Np

Am Cm

Bk

Cf

Es

Fm Md

No

Lr

Pu

form anions that exhibit the electron conﬁguration of the noble gas in the same period.
Metallic character is observed to increase going down a given group, which is consistent
with the trends in ionization energy, electron afﬁnity, and electronegativity discussed earlier
(see Sections 7.13 and 8.2).

Atomic Size and Group Anomalies
Although the chemical properties of the members of a group show many similarities,
there are also important differences. In fact, the relatively large increase in atomic radius
in going from the ﬁrst to the second member of a group causes the ﬁrst element to show
properties that are often quite different from the others. Consequently, hydrogen, beryllium, boron, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and ﬂuorine all have some properties that distinguish them from the other members of their groups. For example, in Group 1A hydrogen is a nonmetal and lithium is a very active metal. This extreme difference results
primarily from the very large difference in the atomic radii of hydrogen and lithium, as
shown in Fig. 19.2. The small hydrogen atom has a much greater attraction for electrons
than do the larger members of Group 1A and forms covalent bonds with nonmetals; the
other members of Group 1A lose their valence electrons to nonmetals to form 1 cations
in ionic compounds.
This effect of size is also evident in other groups. For example, the oxides of the metals in Group 2A are all quite basic except for the ﬁrst member of the series; beryllium
oxide (BeO) is amphoteric. Recall from Section 14.10 that the basicity of an oxide depends on its ionic character. Ionic oxides contain the O2 ion, which reacts with water to
form two OH ions. All the oxides of the Group 2A metals are highly ionic except for
beryllium oxide, which has considerable covalent character. The small Be2 ion can
effectively polarize the electron “cloud” of the O2 ion, producing signiﬁcant electron
sharing. We see the same pattern in Group 3A, where only the small boron atom behaves
as a nonmetal, or sometimes as a semimetal, and aluminum and the other members are
active metals.
In Group 4A the effect of size is reﬂected in the dramatic differences between the
chemistry of carbon and that of silicon. The chemistry of carbon is dominated by molecules containing chains of C¬C bonds, but silicon compounds mainly contain Si¬O
bonds rather than Si¬Si bonds. Carbon forms a wide variety of stable compounds with
strong C¬C single bonds. Silicon also forms compounds with chains of Si¬Si bonds,

19.1 A Survey of the Representative Elements

877

Atomic radius decreases

Atomic radius increases

1A

FIGURE 19.2
The atomic radii of some atoms in
picometers.

2A

3A

4A

5A

6A

7A

8A

H

He

37

32

B

C

N

O

F

Ne

113

88

77

70

66

64

69

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

186

160

143

117

110

104

99

97

K

Ca

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

227

197

122

122

121

117

114

110

Rb

Sr

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

247

215

163

140

141

143

133

130

Cs

Ba

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

265

217

170

175

155

167

140

145

Li

Be

152

but these compounds are much more reactive than the corresponding carbon compounds.
The reasons for the difference in reactivity between the carbon and silicon compounds are
quite complex but are likely related to the differences in the sizes of the carbon and silicon
atoms.
Carbon and silicon differ markedly in their abilities to form p bonds. As we discussed
in Section 9.1, carbon dioxide is composed of discrete CO2 molecules with the Lewis
structure

where the carbon and oxygen atoms achieve the [Ne] conﬁguration by forming p bonds.
In contrast, the structure of silica (empirical formula SiO2) is based on SiO4 tetrahedra
with Si¬O¬Si bridges, as shown in Fig. 19.3. The silicon 3p valence orbitals do not
overlap very effectively with the smaller oxygen 2p orbitals to form p bonds; therefore,
discrete SiO2 molecules with the Lewis structure

878

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A
are not stable. Instead, the silicon atoms achieve a noble gas conﬁguration by forming
several Si¬O single bonds.
The importance of p bonding for the relatively small elements of the second period
also explains the different elemental forms of the members of Groups 5A and 6A. For example, elemental nitrogen consists of very stable N2 molecules with the Lewis structure

O

O
Si

O

O

FIGURE 19.3
The structure of quartz, which has the empirical formula SiO2. Note that the structure
is based on interlocking SiO4 tetrahedra,
where each oxygen atom is shared by two
silicon atoms.

Elemental phosphorus forms larger aggregates of atoms, the simplest being the tetrahedral
P4 molecules found in white phosphorus (see Fig. 20.12). Like silicon atoms, the relatively large phosphorus atoms do not form strong p bonds and prefer to achieve a noble
gas conﬁguration by forming single bonds to several other phosphorus atoms. In contrast,
its very strong p bonds make the N2 molecule the most stable form of elemental nitrogen. Similarly, in Group 6A the most stable form of elemental oxygen is the O2 molecule
with a double bond, but the larger sulfur atom forms bigger aggregates, such as the cyclic
S8 molecule (see Fig. 20.16), which contains only single bonds.
The relatively large change in size in going from the ﬁrst to second member of a
group also has important consequences for the Group 7A elements. For example, ﬂuorine
has a smaller electron afﬁnity than chlorine. This reversal of the expected trend can be attributed to the small ﬂuorine 2p orbitals, which result in unusually large electron repulsions. The relative weakness of the bond in the F2 molecule can be explained in terms of
the repulsions among the lone pairs, shown in the Lewis structure:

The small size of the ﬂuorine atoms allows close approach of the lone pairs, which leads
to much greater repulsions than are found in the Cl2 molecule with its much larger atoms.

Abundance and Preparation
Table 19.1 shows the distribution of elements in the earth’s crust, oceans, and atmosphere.
The major element is, of course, oxygen, which is found in the atmosphere as O2, in the
oceans in H2O, and in the earth’s crust primarily in silicate and carbonate minerals. The
second most abundant element, silicon, is found throughout the earth’s crust in the silica
and silicate minerals that form the basis of most sand, rocks, and soil. The most abundant
metals, aluminum and iron, are found in ores in which they are combined with nonmetals,
most commonly oxygen. One notable fact revealed by Table 19.1 is the small incidence
of most transition metals. Since many of these relatively rare elements are assuming

TABLE 19.1 Distribution (Mass Percent) of the 18 Most Abundant Elements in
the Earth’s Crust, Oceans, and Atmosphere
Element

Sand dunes in Monument Valley, Arizona.

Oxygen
Silicon
Aluminum
Iron
Calcium
Sodium
Potassium
Magnesium
Hydrogen
Titanium

Mass Percent
49.2
25.7
7.50
4.71
3.39
2.63
2.40
1.93
0.87
0.58

Element
Chlorine
Phosphorus
Manganese
Carbon
Sulfur
Barium
Nitrogen
Fluorine
All others

Mass Percent
0.19
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.49

19.1 A Survey of the Representative Elements

TABLE 19.2

Abundance of Elements in the Human Body

Major Elements
Oxygen
Carbon
Hydrogen
Nitrogen
Calcium
Phosphorus
Magnesium
Potassium
Sulfur
Sodium
Chlorine
Iron
Zinc

Metallurgy is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 21.
Carbon is the cheapest and most readily
available industrial reducing agent for
metallic ions.

879

Trace Elements
(in alphabetical order)

Mass Percent
65.0
18.0
10.0
3.0
1.4
1.0
0.50
0.34
0.26
0.14
0.14
0.004
0.003

Arsenic
Chromium
Cobalt
Copper
Fluorine
Iodine
Manganese
Molybdenum
Nickel
Selenium
Silicon
Vanadium

increasing importance in our high-technology society, it is possible that the control of
transition metal ores may ultimately have more signiﬁcance for world politics than the
control of petroleum supplies.
The distribution of elements in living materials is very different from that found in
the earth’s crust. Table 19.2 shows the relative abundance of elements in the human body.
Oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen form the basis for all biologically important molecules. The other elements, even though they are found in relatively small amounts, are
often crucial for life. For example, zinc is found in over 150 different biomolecules in the
human body.
Only about one-fourth of the elements occur naturally in the free state. Most are found
in a combined state. The process of obtaining a metal from its ore is called metallurgy.
Since the metals in ores are found in the form of cations, the chemistry of metallurgy
always involves reduction of the ions to the elemental metal (with an oxidation state of
zero). A variety of reducing agents can be used, but carbon is the usual choice because of
its wide availability and relatively low cost. As we will see in Chapter 21, carbon is the
primary reducing agent in the production of steel. Carbon also can be used to produce tin
and lead from their oxides:
2SnO1s2  C1s2 ¡ 2Sn1s2  CO2 1g2
Heat
2PbO1s2  C1s2 ¡ 2Pb1s2  CO2 1g2
Heat

Hydrogen gas also can be used as a reducing agent for metal oxides, as in the production
of tin:
SnO1s2  H2 1g2 ¡ Sn1s2  H2O1g2
Heat

Electrolysis is often used to reduce the most active metals. In Chapter 17 we considered the electrolytic production of aluminum metal. The alkali metals are also produced
by electrolysis, usually of their molten halide salts.
The preparation of nonmetals varies widely. Elemental nitrogen and oxygen are usually obtained from the liquefaction of air, which is based on the principle that a real gas
cools when it expands. After each expansion, part of the cooler gas is compressed, while
the rest is used to carry away the heat of the compression. The compressed gas is then allowed to expand again. This cycle is repeated many times. Eventually, the remaining gas
becomes cold enough to form the liquid state. Because liquid nitrogen and liquid oxygen
have different boiling points, they can be separated by the distillation of liquid air. Both

880

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A
substances are important industrial chemicals, ranking in the top ﬁve in terms of the
amounts manufactured in the United States. Hydrogen can be obtained from the electrolysis
of water, but more commonly it is obtained from the decomposition of the methane in
natural gas. Sulfur is found underground in its elemental form and is recovered using the
Frasch process (see Section 20.6). The halogens are obtained by oxidation of the anions
from halide salts (see Section 20.7).

The preparation of sulfur and the
halogens is discussed in Chapter 20.

19.2
1A
H
Li

Several properties of the alkali
metals are given in Table 7.8.

Na
K
Rb
Cs

The Group 1A Elements

The Group 1A elements with their ns1 valence-electron conﬁgurations are all very active
metals (they lose their valence electrons very readily), except for hydrogen, which behaves
as a nonmetal. We will discuss the chemistry of hydrogen in the next section. Many of
the properties of the alkali metals have been described previously (see Section 7.13). The
sources and methods of preparation of pure alkali metals are given in Table 19.3. The ionization energies, standard reduction potentials, ionic radii, and melting points for the alkali
metals are listed in Table 19.4. Lepidolite, shown in Fig. 19.4, contains several pure alkali
metals.
In Section 7.13 we saw that the alkali metals all react vigorously with water to release
hydrogen gas:
2M1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2M 1aq2  2OH 1aq2  H2 1g2

Fr

We will reconsider this process brieﬂy because it illustrates several important concepts.
Based on the ionization energies, we might expect lithium to be the weakest of the alkali
metals as a reducing agent in water. However, the standard reduction potentials indicate
that it is the strongest. This reversal results mainly from the very large energy of hydration

TABLE 19.3
Element

Source

Method of Preparation

Lithium

Silicate minerals such as
spodumene, LiAl(Si2O6)

Electrolysis of molten LiCl

Sodium

NaCl

Electrolysis of molten NaCl

Potassium

KCl

Electrolysis of molten KCl

Rubidium

Impurity in lepidolite,
Li2(F,OH)2Al2(SiO3)3

Reduction of RbOH with Mg
and H2

Cesium

Pollucite (Cs4Al4Si9O26  H2O) and
an impurity in lepidolite
(see Fig. 19.4)

Reduction of CsOH with Mg
and H2

TABLE 19.4

Element

FIGURE 19.4
Lepidolite is composed mainly of lithium,
aluminum, silicon, and oxygen, but it also
contains signiﬁcant amounts of rubidium
and cesium.

Sources and Methods of Preparation of the Pure Alkali Metals

Lithium
Sodium
Potassium
Rubidium
Cesium

Selected Physical Properties of the Alkali Metals
Ionization
Energy
(kJ/mol)

Standard Reduction
Potential (V) for
M  e S M

Radius
of M
(pm)

Melting
Point
(°C)

520
495
419
409
382

3.05
2.71
2.92
2.99
3.02

60
95
133
148
169

180
98
63
39
29

19.2 The Group 1A Elements

Sodium reacting with water.

881

of the small Li ion. Because of its relatively high charge density, the Li ion very effectively attracts water molecules. A large quantity of energy is released in the process,
favoring the formation of the Li ion and making lithium a strong reducing agent in aqueous solution.
We also saw in Section 7.13 that lithium, although it is the strongest reducing agent,
reacts more slowly with water than does sodium or potassium. From the discussions in
Chapters 12 and 16, we know that the equilibrium position for a reaction (in this case
indicated by the e° values) is controlled by thermodynamic factors but that the rate of a
reaction is controlled by kinetic factors. There is no direct connection between these factors. Lithium reacts more slowly with water than does sodium or potassium because as a
solid it has a higher melting point than either of them. It does not become molten from
the heat of reaction with water as sodium and potassium do, and thus it has a smaller area
of contact with the water.
The relative ease with which the alkali metals lose electrons to form M cations means
that they react with nonmetals to form ionic compounds. Although we might expect the
alkali metals to react with oxygen to form regular oxides of the general formula M2O,
lithium is the only one that does so in the presence of excess oxygen gas:
4Li1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2Li2O1s2

Hydrogen peroxide has the Lewis
structure

Sodium forms solid Na2O if the oxygen supply is limited, but in excess oxygen it
forms sodium peroxide:
2Na1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ Na2O2 1s2

H
O

O

H

Sodium peroxide contains the basic O22 anion and reacts with water to form hydrogen
peroxide and hydroxide ions:
Na2O2 1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2Na 1aq2  H2O2 1aq2  2OH 1aq2
Hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidizing agent often used as a bleach for hair and as a
disinfectant.
Potassium, rubidium, and cesium react with oxygen to produce superoxides of the
general formula MO2, which contains the O2 anion. For example, potassium reacts with
oxygen as follows:
K1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ KO2 1s2
The superoxides release oxygen gas in reactions with water or carbon dioxide:
2MO2 1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2M 1aq2  2OH 1aq2  O2 1g2  H2O2 1aq2
4MO2 1s2  2CO2 1g2 ¡ 2M2CO3 1s2  3O2 1g2
This chemistry makes superoxides very useful in the self-contained breathing apparatuses
used by ﬁreﬁghters. These “airpacks” are also used as emergency equipment in labs and
production facilities in case toxic fumes are released.
The types of compounds formed by the alkali metals with oxygen are summarized in
Table 19.5. Table 19.6 summarizes some important reactions of the alkali metals.

TABLE 19.5 Types of Compounds Formed by the Alkali
Metals with Oxygen
General Formula

Airpacks are an essential source of oxygen
for ﬁreﬁghters.

M2O
M2O2
MO2

Name

Examples

Oxide
Peroxide
Superoxide

Li2O, Na2O
Na2O2
KO2, RbO2, CsO2

882

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A

TABLE 19.6

Sodium reacts violently with chlorine.

Selected Reactions of the Alkali Metals

Reaction

Comment

2M  X2 S 2MX
4Li  O2 S 2Li2O
2Na  O2 S Na2O2
M  O2 S MO2
2M  S S M2S
6Li  N2 S 2Li3N
12M  P4 S 4M3P
2M  H2 S 2MH
2M  2H2O S 2MOH  H2
2M  2H S 2M  H2

X2  any halogen molecule
Excess oxygen
M  K, Rb, or Cs
Li only

Violent reaction!

The alkali metal ions are very important for the proper functioning of biologic systems, such as nerves and muscles, and Na and K ions are present in all body cells and
ﬂuids. In human blood plasma the concentrations are
3Na 4  0.15 M

and

3K 4  0.005 M

For the ﬂuids inside the cells the concentrations are reversed:
3Na 4  0.005 M

and

3K 4  0.16 M

Since the concentrations are so different inside and outside the cells, an elaborate mechanism is needed to transport Na and K ions through the cell membranes.
Recently, studies have been carried out concerning the role of the Li ion in the human
brain, and lithium carbonate has been used extensively in the treatment of manic-depressive
patients. The Li ion apparently affects the levels of neurotransmitters, molecules that
assist the transmission of messages along the nerve networks. Incorrect concentrations of
these molecules can lead to depression or mania.

Sample Exercise 19.1

Predicting Reaction Products
Predict the products formed by the following reactants.
a. Li3N(s) and H2O(l)
b. KO2(s) and H2O(l)
Solution
a. Solid Li3N contains the N3 anion, which has a strong attraction for three H ions to
form NH3. Thus the reaction is
Li3N1s2  3H2O1l2 ¡ NH3 1g2  3Li 1aq2  3OH 1aq2
b. Solid KO2 is a superoxide that characteristically reacts with water to produce O2, H2O2,
and OH:
2KO2 1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2K 1aq2  2OH 1aq2  O2 1g2  H2O2 1aq2
See Exercises 19.17 and 19.18.

19.3 Hydrogen

19.3

883

Hydrogen

Under ordinary conditions of temperature and pressure, hydrogen is a colorless, odorless
gas composed of H2 molecules. Because of its low molar mass and nonpolarity, hydrogen
has a very low boiling point (253°C) and melting point (260°C) . Hydrogen gas is
highly ﬂammable, and mixtures of air containing from 18% to 60% hydrogen by volume
are explosive. In a common lecture demonstration hydrogen and oxygen gases are bubbled into soapy water. The resulting bubbles can be ignited with a candle on a long stick,
giving a loud explosion.
The major industrial source of hydrogen gas is the reaction of methane and water at
high temperatures (8001000°C) and high pressures (1050 atm) with a metallic catalyst, often nickel:
CH4 1g2  H2O1g2 ¬¬¬¬¬¬¡ CO1g2  3H2 1g2
Heat, pressure
Catalyst

Large quantities of hydrogen are also formed as a by-product of gasoline production, in
which hydrocarbons with high molar masses are broken down (cracked) to produce smaller
molecules more suitable for use as a motor fuel.
Very pure hydrogen can be produced by electrolysis of water (see Section 17.7), but
this method is currently not economically feasible for large-scale production because of
the relatively high cost of electricity.
The major industrial use of hydrogen is in the production of ammonia by the Haber
process. Large quantities of hydrogen are also used for hydrogenating unsaturated vegetable oils (those containing carbon–carbon double bonds) to produce solid shortenings
that are saturated (containing carbon–carbon single bonds):

The catalysis of this process was discussed in Section 12.8.
Chemically, hydrogen behaves as a typical nonmetal, forming covalent compounds
with other nonmetals and forming salts with very active metals. Binary compounds
containing hydrogen are called hydrides, of which there are three classes. The ionic

(left) Hydrogen gas being used to blow
soap bubbles. (right) As the bubbles ﬂoat
upward, they are lighted using a candle on
a long pole. The orange ﬂame is due to the
heat from the reaction of hydrogen with
the oxygen in the air that excites sodium
ions in the soap solution.

884

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A
(or saltlike) hydrides are formed when hydrogen combines with the most active metals, those from Groups 1A and 2A. Examples are LiH and CaH2, which can best be
characterized as containing hydride ions (H ) and metal cations. Because the presence
of two electrons in the small 1s orbital produces large electron–electron repulsions and
the nucleus has only a 1 charge, the hydride ion is a strong reducing agent (easily
loses electrons). For example, when ionic hydrides are placed in water, a violent reaction takes place. This reaction results in the formation of hydrogen gas, as seen in
the equation
LiH1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2 1g2  Li 1aq2  OH 1aq2

Boiling points of covalent hydrides are
discussed in Section 10.1.

FIGURE 19.5
The structure of ice, showing the hydrogen
bonding.

Covalent hydrides are formed when hydrogen combines with other nonmetals.
We have encountered many of these compounds already: HCl, CH4, NH3, H2O, and
so on. The most important covalent hydride is water. The polarity of the H2O
molecule leads to many of water’s unusual properties. Water has a much higher
boiling point than is expected from its molar mass. It has a large heat of vaporization
and a large heat capacity, both of which make it a very useful coolant. Water has a
higher density as a liquid than as a solid. This is due to the open structure of ice, which
results from maximizing the hydrogen bonding (see Fig. 19.5). Because water is an
excellent solvent for ionic and polar substances, it provides an effective medium
for life processes. In fact, water is one of the few covalent hydrides that is nontoxic to
organisms.
The third class of hydrides, the metallic (or interstitial) hydrides, are formed when
transition metal crystals are treated with hydrogen gas. The hydrogen molecules dissociate at the metal’s surface, and the small hydrogen atoms migrate into the crystal structure
to occupy holes, or interstices. These metal–hydrogen mixtures are more like solid solutions than true compounds. Palladium can absorb about 900 times its own volume of
hydrogen gas. In fact, hydrogen can be puriﬁed by placing it under slight pressure in a
vessel containing a thin wall of palladium. The hydrogen diffuses into and through the
metal wall, leaving the impurities behind.
Although hydrogen can react with transition metals to form compounds of constant
composition, most of the interstitial hydrides have variable compositions (often called nonstoichiometric compositions) with formulas such as LaH2.76 and VH0.56. The compositions
of the nonstoichiometric hydrides vary with the length of exposure of the metal to hydrogen
gas and other factors.

H2O
Ice

19.4 The Group 2A Elements

See Section 6.6 for a discussion of the
feasibility of using hydrogen gas as a fuel.

When interstitial hydrides are heated, much of the absorbed hydrogen is expelled as
hydrogen gas. Because of this behavior, these materials offer possibilities for storing hydrogen for use as a portable fuel. The internal combustion engines in current automobiles
can burn hydrogen gas with little modiﬁcation, but storage of enough hydrogen to provide an acceptable mileage range remains a problem. One possible solution might be to
use a fuel tank containing a porous solid that includes a transition metal into which the
hydrogen gas could be pumped to form the interstitial hydride. The hydrogen gas could
then be released as required by the engine.

19.4
2A
Be

An amphoteric oxide displays
both acidic and basic properties.

Mg

885

The Group 2A Elements

The Group 2A elements (with valence-electron conﬁguration ns2) are very reactive, losing
their two valence electrons to nonmetals to form ionic compounds containing M2 cations.
These elements are commonly called the alkaline earth metals because of the basicity
of their oxides:
MO1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ M2 1aq2  2OH 1aq2

Ca
Sr

Only beryllium oxide (BeO) also shows some acidic properties, such as dissolving in aqueous solutions containing hydroxide ions:

Ba

BeO1s2  2OH 1aq2  H2O1l2 ¡ Be1OH2 42 1aq2

Ra

The more active alkaline earth metals react with water as the alkali metals do, producing hydrogen gas:
M1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ M2 1aq2  2OH 1aq2  H2 1g2
Calcium, strontium, and barium react vigorously at 25°C. The less easily oxidized beryllium and magnesium show no observable reaction with water at 25°C, although magnesium reacts with boiling water. Table 19.7 summarizes various properties, sources, and
preparations of the alkaline earth metals.

TABLE 19.7

Selected Physical Properties, Sources, and Methods of Preparation for the Group 2A Elements
Ionization
Energy
(kJ/mol)

Radius
of M2
(pm)

First

Second

e (V) for
M2  2e S M

30

900

1760

Magnesium

65

738

Calcium

99

Strontium

Source

Method of
Preparation

1.70

Beryl
(Be3Al2Si6O18)

Electrolysis of
molten BeCl2

1450

2.37

Magnesite (MgCO3),
dolomite (MgCO3  CaCO3),
carnallite (MgCl2  KCl  6H2O)

Electrolysis of
molten MgCl2

590

1146

2.76

Various minerals containing
CaCO3

Electrolysis of
molten CaCl2

113

549

1064

2.89

Celestite (SrSO4),
strontianite (SrCO3)

Electrolysis of
molten SrCl2

Barium

135

503

965

2.90

Baryte (BaSO4),
witherite (BaCO3)

Electrolysis of
molten BaCl2

Radium

140

509

979

2.92

Pitchblende
(1 g of Ra/7 tons of ore)

Electrolysis of
molten RaCl2

Element
Beryllium

886

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A

Cl
Be
Cl

Cl
Be

Cl
Be

Cl

Cl

Cl

Cl

(a)

Be

Be
Cl

Be
Cl

(b)

FIGURE 19.6
(a) Solid BeCl2 can be visualized as being formed from
many BeCl2 molecules, where lone pairs on the chlorine
atoms are used to bond to the beryllium atoms in adjacent
BeCl2 molecules. (b) The extended structure of solid BeCl2.
(c) The ball-and-stick model of the extended structure.

Calcium metal reacting with water to form
bubbles of hydrogen gas.
(c)

As we saw in Section 19.1, the small size and relatively high electronegativity of the
beryllium atom cause its bonds to be more covalent than is usual for a metal. For example, beryllium chloride with the Lewis structure

exists as a linear molecule, as predicted by the VSEPR model. The Be¬Cl bonds are
covalent, and beryllium is best described as being sp hybridized. As a solid, BeCl2 achieves
an octet of electrons around each beryllium atom by forming an extended structure
containing Be in a tetrahedral environment, as shown in Fig. 19.6. The lone pairs on the
chlorine atoms are used to form Be¬Cl bonds.
The alkaline earth metals have great practical importance. Calcium and magnesium
ions are essential for human life. Calcium is found primarily in the structural minerals
constituting bones and teeth; magnesium (as the Mg2 ion) plays a vital role in metabolism and muscle functions. Also, magnesium was formerly used to produce the bright light
for photographic ﬂash bulbs from its reaction with oxygen:
2Mg1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2MgO1s2  light
Because magnesium metal has a relatively low density and moderate strength, it is a useful
structural material, especially if alloyed with aluminum.
Table 19.8 summarizes some important reactions of the alkaline earth metals.
TABLE 19.8

Bones contain large amounts of calcium.

Selected Reactions of the Group 2A Elements

Reaction

Comment

M  X2 S MX2

X2  any halogen molecule

2M  O2 S 2MO
M  S S MS

Ba gives BaO2 as well

3M  N2 S M3N2

High temperatures

6M  P4 S 2M3P2

High temperatures

M  H2 S MH2

M  Ca, Sr, or Ba; high temperatures;
Mg at high pressure

M  2H2O S M(OH) 2  H2
M  2H S M2  H2
Be  2OH  2H2O S Be(OH) 42  H2

M  Ca, Sr, or Ba

19.4 The Group 2A Elements

Resin
polymer

Resin

887

Hard water

SO3– Na+

Mg2+

SO3– Na+
SO3– Na+

Ca2+

SO3– Na+
(a)
Resin

Hard water

SO3– Na+

Mg2+

SO3– Na+
SO3– Na+

Ca2+

SO3– Na+
(b)
Resin

The Dolomite mountains in Italy. Dolomite
is a source of magnesium.

Soft water

SO3–

2+

Na+

Mg
SO3–
SO3–
SO3–

Na+
Ca2+

Na+
Na+

(c)

FIGURE 19.7
(a) A schematic representation of a typical
cation-exchange resin. (b) and (c) When
hard water is passed over the cationexchange resin, the Ca2 and Mg2 bind to
the resin.

Sample Exercise 19.2

Relatively large concentrations of Ca2 and Mg2 ions are often found in natural
water supplies. These ions in this hard water interfere with the action of detergents
and form precipitates with soap. In Section 14.6 we saw that Ca2 is often removed
by precipitation as CaCO3 in large-scale water softening. In individual homes Ca2,
Mg2, and other cations are removed by ion exchange. An ion-exchange resin consists of large molecules (polymers) that have many ionic sites. A cation-exchange resin
is represented schematically in Fig. 19.7(a), showing Na ions bound ionically to the
SO3 groups that are covalently attached to the resin polymer. When hard water is
passed over the resin, Ca2 and Mg2 bind to the resin in place of Na, which is released into the solution [Fig. 19.7(b)]. Replacing Mg2 and Ca2 by Na [Fig. 19.7(c)]
“softens” the water because the sodium ions interfere much less with the action of
soaps and detergents.

Electrolytic Production of Magnesium
Calculate the amount of time required to produce 1.00  103 kg of magnesium metal by
the electrolysis of molten MgCl2 using a current of 1.00  102 A.
Solution
The reaction for plating magnesium is
Mg2  2e ¡ Mg
which means that 2 moles of electrons are required for each mole of Mg produced. The
number of moles of magnesium in 1.00  103 kg is
1.00  103 kg 
Thus

1000 g
1 mol Mg

 4.11  104 mol Mg
kg
24.31 g

2 mol e
 4.11  104 mol Mg  8.22  104 mol e
1 mol Mg

888

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A
Using the faraday (96,485 C/mol e ) , we can calculate the coulombs of charge:
8.22  104 mol e 

96,485 C
 7.93  109 C
mol e

Since an ampere is a coulomb of charge per second, we can now calculate the time
required:
7.93  109 C
 7.93  107 s
1.00  102 C/s

or

918 days
See Exercises 19.29 and 19.30.

19.5

The Group 3A elements (valence-electron conﬁguration ns2np1) generally show the increase in metallic character in going down the group that is characteristic of the representative elements. Some physical properties, sources, and methods of preparation for the
Group 3A elements are summarized in Table 19.9.
Boron is a nonmetal, and most of its compounds are covalent. The most interesting
compounds of boron are the covalent hydrides called boranes. We might expect BH3 to be
the simplest hydride, since boron has three valence electrons to share with three hydrogen
atoms. However, this compound is unstable, and the simplest known member of the series
is diborane (B2H6), with the structure shown in Fig. 19.8(a). In this molecule the terminal
B¬H bonds are normal covalent bonds, each involving one electron pair. The bridging
bonds are three-center bonds using a single pair of electrons to bond all three atoms. Another interesting borane contains the square pyramidal B5H9 molecule [Fig. 19.8(b)], which
has four three-center bonds around the base of the pyramid. Because the boranes are extremely electron-deﬁcient, they are highly reactive. The boranes react very exothermically with oxygen and were once evaluated as potential fuels for rockets in the U.S. space
program.
Aluminum, the most abundant metal on earth, has metallic physical properties, such
as high thermal and electrical conductivities and a lustrous appearance, but its bonds to
nonmetals are signiﬁcantly covalent. This covalency is responsible for the amphoteric

3A
B
Al
Ga
In
Tl

TABLE 19.9

Selected Physical Properties, Sources, and Methods of Preparation for the Group 3A Elements
Radius
of M3
(pm)

Ionization
Energy
(kJ/mol)

Boron

20

798

Aluminum

51

581

Gallium

62

Indium
Thallium

Element

The Group 3A Elements

e (V) for
M3  3e S M
—

Sources

Method of
Preparation

Kernite, a form of
borax (Na2B4O7  4H2O)

Reduction by Mg or H2

1.71

Bauxite (Al2O3)

Electrolysis of
Al2O3 in molten
Na3AlF6

577

0.53

Traces in various minerals

Reduction with H2
or electrolysis

81

556

0.34

Traces in various minerals

Reduction with H2
or electrolysis

95

589

0.72

Traces in various minerals

Electrolysis

889

19.5 The Group 3A Elements

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Boost Your Boron
veryone realizes that the body needs protein, carbohydrates, vitamins, and even fat. The importance of several
trace elements in our diet, however, is often poorly understood. An example is the element boron. People in the United
States have a relatively low intake of boron. For example,
the U.S. population consumes a little more than 1 mg of
boron per day, which is about 10% less than people living
in Great Britain and Egypt and about 35% less than people
in Germany and Mexico.
To study the importance of boron intake, Zuo-Fen
Zhang and his colleagues in the School of Public Health at
the University of California–Los Angeles examined nutrition data collected from thousands of men and women who
ﬁlled out the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES). Zhang and his coworkers learned that

E

boron seems to protect against prostate cancer. Comparing
the diets of men with prostate cancer to those without the
disease indicated a strong correlation between boron consumption and the absence of the disease. The prostate cancer risk for men eating at least 1.8 mg boron per day was
only one-third that of men who consumed less than 0.9 mg
boron per day. The data show that boron offers no apparent
protection for other types of cancer, just very speciﬁc protection for prostate cancer. Other studies involving animals
indicate that boron consumption can furnish protection
against autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Although boron intake in the neighborhood of 3.0
mg/day seems beneﬁcial, large amounts of boron can be
toxic. The best way to obtain extra boron in your diet is by
consuming foods such as nuts and noncitrus fruits.

nature of Al2O3, which dissolves in acidic or basic solution, and for the acidity of
Al(H2O)63 (see Section 14.8):
Al1H2O2 63 1aq2 ∆ Al1OH21H2O2 52 1aq2  H 1aq2

Gallium metal has such a low melting point
(30°C) that it melts from the heat of a
hand.

One especially interesting property of gallium is its unusually low melting point at
29.8°C, which is in contrast to the 660°C melting point of aluminum. Gallium’s boiling
point is approximately 2400°C. This gives gallium the largest liquid range of any metal,
which makes it useful for thermometers, especially to measure high temperatures. Gallium,
like water, expands when it freezes. The chemistry of gallium is quite similar to that of
aluminum. For example, Ga2O3 is amphoteric.
Table 19.10 summarizes some important reactions of the Group 3A elements.
The practical importance of the Group 3A elements centers on aluminum. Since the
discovery of the electrolytic production process by Hall and Heroult (see Section 17.8),
aluminum has become a highly important structural material in a wide variety of applications from aircraft bodies to bicycle components. Aluminum is especially valuable because it has a high strength-to-weight ratio and because it protects itself from corrosion
by developing a tough, adherent oxide coating.

B2H6

Boron

B5H9

Hydrogen
(a)

(b)

FIGURE 19.8
(a) The structure of B2H6 with its two three-center B¬ H¬ B bridging bonds and four “normal”
B¬ H bonds. (b) The structure of B5H9. There are ﬁve “normal” B¬ H bonds to terminal hydrogens and four three-center bridging bonds around the base.

890

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A

Aluminum is used in airplane construction.

TABLE 19.10
Reaction

Comment

2M  3X2 S 2MX3

X2  any halogen molecule; Tl gives
TlX as well, but no TlI3

4M  3O2 S 2M2O3

High temperatures; Tl gives Tl2O as well

2M  3S S M2S3

High temperatures; Tl gives Tl2S as well

2M  N2 S 2MN

M  Al only

2M  6H S 2M3  3H2

M  Al, Ga, or In; Tl gives Tl

2M  2OH  6H2O S 2M(OH) 4  3H2

M  Al or Ga

19.6
4A
C
Si
Ge
Sn
Pb

Selected Reactions of the Group 3A Elements

The Group 4A Elements

Group 4A (with the valence-electron conﬁguration ns2np2) contains two of the most important elements on earth: carbon, the fundamental constituent of the molecules necessary for life, and silicon, which forms the basis of the geologic world. The change from
nonmetallic to metallic properties seen in Group 3A is also apparent in going down Group
4A from carbon, a typical nonmetal, to silicon and germanium, usually considered semimetals, to the metals tin and lead. Table 19.11 summarizes some physical properties,
sources, and methods of preparation for the elements in this group.
All the Group 4A elements can form four covalent bonds to nonmetals—for example,
CH4, SiF4, GeBr4, SnCl4, and PbCl4. In each of these tetrahedral molecules, the central
atom is described as sp3 hybridized by the localized electron model. All these compounds,
except those of carbon, can react with Lewis bases to form two additional covalent
bonds. For example, SnCl4, which is a fuming liquid (bp  114°C) , can add two chloride
ions:
SnCl4  2Cl ¡ SnCl62
Carbon compounds cannot react in this way because of the small atomic size of carbon
and because there are no d orbitals on carbon to accommodate the extra electrons, as there
are on the other elements in the group.

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

19.6 The Group 4A Elements

TABLE 19.11

891

Selected Physical Properties, Sources, and Methods of Preparation for the Group 4A Elements
Melting
Point (C)

Boiling
Point (C)

2.5

3727
(sublimes)

—

Silicon

1.8

1410

Germanium

1.8

937

Element

Electronegativity

Carbon

Method of
Preparation

Sources
Graphite, diamond,
petroleum, coal

—

2355

Silicate minerals, silica

Reduction of K2SiF6 with
Al, or reduction of SiO2
with Mg

2830

Germanite (mixture
of copper, iron, and
germanium sulﬁdes)

Reduction of GeO2 with
H2 or C

Tin

1.8

232

2270

Cassiterite (SnO2)

Reduction of SnO2 with C

Lead

1.9

327

1740

Galena (PbS)

Roasting of PbS with
O2 to form PbO2 and then
reduction with C

Although graphite is thermodynamically
more stable than diamond, the transformation of diamond to graphite is not
observed under normal conditions.
Fullerenes have been discovered recently
by geologists in ancient rocks in Russia.

TABLE 19.12 Strengths of
C¬C, Si¬Si, and Si¬O Bonds
Bond

Bond Energy
(kJ/mol)

C¬C
Si¬Si
Si¬O

347
340
452

We have seen that carbon also differs markedly from the other members of Group 4A
in its ability to form p bonds. This accounts for the completely different structures and
properties of CO2 and SiO2. Note from Table 19.12 that C¬C bonds and Si¬O bonds
are stronger than Si¬Si bonds. This partly explains why the chemistry of carbon is dominated by C¬C bonds, whereas that of silicon is dominated by Si¬O bonds.
Carbon occurs in the earth’s crust mainly in two allotropic forms—graphite and diamond. In addition, new forms of elemental carbon, including buckminsterfullerene (C60)
and other related substances, have recently been characterized. The structures of graphite
and diamond are given in Section 10.5.
Carbon monoxide (CO), one of three oxides of carbon, is an odorless, colorless, and
toxic gas formed as a by-product of the combustion of carbon-containing compounds when
there is a limited oxygen supply. Incidents of carbon monoxide poisoning are especially
common in the winter in cold areas of the world when blocked furnace vents limit the
availability of oxygen. The bonding in carbon monoxide, which has the Lewis structure

is described in terms of sp hybridized carbon and oxygen atoms that interact to form one
s and two p bonds.
Carbon dioxide, a linear molecule with the Lewis structure

has an sp hybridized carbon atom, and is a product of human and animal respiration and of
the combustion of fossil fuels. It is also produced by fermentation, a process by which the sugar
in fruits and grains is changed to ethanol (C2H5OH) and carbon dioxide (see Section 22.4):
C6H12O6 1aq2 ¡ 2C2H5OH1aq2  2CO2 1g2
Enzymes

Glucose

Carbon dioxide dissolves in water to produce an acidic solution:
CO2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2
Carbon suboxide, the third carbon oxide, is a linear molecule with the Lewis structure
S

S

S

OP CP CP CP O

S

(top) A processed silicon wafer with
(bottom) a silicon microchip.

which contains sp hybridized carbon atoms.

892

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Concrete Learning
oncrete has literally paved the way for civilization
over the past 5000 years, tracing its roots to the ancient Egyptians. At a cost of about a penny per pound,
concrete is ubiquitous in today’s world—used in houses,
factories, roads, dams, cooling towers, pipes, skyscrapers,
and countless other places. In the United States alone
there are an estimated $6 trillion worth of concrete-based
structures.
Most concretes are based on Portland cement, patented in
1824 by an English bricklayer named J. Aspdin and so named
because it forms a product that resembles the natural limestone
on the Isle of Portland in England. Portland cement is a powder containing a mixture of calcium silicates [Ca2SiO4 (26%)
and Ca3SiO5 (51%)], calcium aluminate [Ca3Al2O6 (11%)],
and calcium iron aluminate [Ca4Al2Fe2O10 (1%)]. Portland cement is made from a mixture of limestone, sand, shale, clay,
and gypsum (CaSO4  2H2O) . When the cement is mixed
with sand, gravel, and water, it turns into a muddy substance
that eventually hardens into the familiar concrete that ﬁnds
so many uses in our world. The hardening of concrete occurs
not through drying but through hydration. The material
becomes dry and hard as the water is consumed in building
the complex silicate structures present in cured concrete.
Although many of the details of this process are poorly
understood, the main “glue” that holds the components of
concrete together is calcium silicate hydrate, which forms a
three-dimensional network mainly responsible for concrete’s
strength.
Despite its strength when newly produced, concrete
contains pockets of air and water dispersed throughout,

C

The compositions of these alloys vary
signiﬁcantly. For example, the tin content
of bronze varies from 5% to 30%, and
the tin content of pewter is often as high
as 95%.

making it porous and subject to deterioration. Thus, despite
all the advantages of concrete, it cracks and deteriorates
seriously over time.
Much research is now being carried out to improve the
durability of concrete. Most of these efforts are directed toward lowering the porosity of concrete and making it less
brittle. One group of additives aimed at solving this problem consists of molecules with carbon atom backbones that
have sulfate groups attached. These so-called superplasticizers allow the formation of concrete using much less
water, and these chemicals have doubled the strength of
ready-mix concrete over the past 20 years.
Researchers also have found that the properties of concrete can be greatly improved by adding ﬁbers of various
kinds, including those made of steel, glass, and carbon-based
polymers. One type of ﬁber concrete—called slurry inﬁltrated ﬁber concrete (SIFCON), which is tough enough to
be used to make missile silos and can be formed into complex shapes—may be especially useful for structures in
earthquake-prone areas.
Other efforts to improve concrete center on replacing
Portland cement with other binders such as carbon-based
polymers. Although these polymer-based concretes will burn
and do lose their shapes at high temperatures, they are much
more resistant to the effects of water, acids, and salts than
those made with Portland cement.
Despite the fact that most concrete now used is very
similar to that used by the Romans to build the Pantheon,
progress is being made, and revolutionary improvements
may be just around the corner.

Silicon, the second most abundant element in the earth’s crust, is a semimetal found
widely distributed in silica and silicates (see Section 10.5). Approximately 85% of the
earth’s crust is composed of these substances. Although silicon is found in some steel
and aluminum alloys, its major use is in semiconductors for electronic devices (see the
Chemical Impact in Section 10.5).
Germanium, a relatively rare element, is a semimetal used mainly in the manufacture
of semiconductors for transistors and similar electronic devices.
Tin is a soft silvery metal that can be rolled into thin sheets (tin foil) and has been
used for centuries in various alloys such as bronze (20% Sn and 80% Cu) , solder
(33% Sn and 67% Pb) , and pewter (85% Sn, 7% Cu, 6% Bi, and 2% Sb) .
Tin exists as three allotropes: white tin, stable at normal temperatures; gray tin, stable at
temperatures below 13.2°C; and brittle tin, found at temperatures above 161°C. When tin
is exposed to low temperatures, it gradually changes to the powdery gray tin and crumbles
away; this process is known as tin disease.

19.6 The Group 4A Elements

893

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Beethoven: Hair Is the Story
udwig van Beethoven, arguably the greatest composer
who ever lived, led a troubled life fraught with sickness,
deafness, and personality aberrations. Now we may know
the source of these difﬁculties: lead poisoning. Scientists
have recently reached this conclusion through analysis of
Beethoven’s hair. When Beethoven died in 1827 at age 56,
many mourners took samples of the great man’s hair. In fact,
it was said at the time that he was practically bald by the
time he was buried. The hair that was recently analyzed
consisted of 582 strands—3 to 6 inches long—bought for
the Center of Beethoven Studies for $7300 in 1994 from
Sotheby’s auction house in London.
According to William Walsh of the Health Research Institute (HRI) in suburban Chicago, Beethoven’s hair showed
a lead concentration 100 times the normal levels. The scientists concluded that Beethoven’s exposure to lead came as
an adult, possibly from the mineral water he drank and swam
in when he visited spas.
The lead poisoning may well explain Beethoven’s
volatile temper—the composer was subject to towering rages
and sometimes had the look of a wild animal. In rare cases
lead poisoning has been known to cause deafness, but the
researchers remain unsure if this problem led to Beethoven’s
hearing loss.
According to Walsh, the scientists at HRI were originally looking for mercury, a common treatment for syphilis

L

Roman baths such as these in Bath,
England, used lead pipes for water.

Portrait of Beethoven by Josef Kari Stieler.

in the early nineteenth century, in Beethoven’s hair. The
absence of mercury supports the consensus of scholars that
Beethoven did not have this disease. Not surprisingly,
Beethoven himself wanted to know what made him so ill.
In a letter to his brothers in 1802, he asked them to have
doctors ﬁnd the cause of his frequent abdominal pain after
his death.

The major current use for tin is as a protective coating for steel, especially for cans
used as food containers. The thin layer of tin, applied electrolytically, forms a protective
oxide coating that prevents further corrosion.
Lead is easily obtained from its ore, galena (PbS). Because lead melts at such a low
temperature, it may have been the ﬁrst pure metal obtained from its ore. We know that
lead was used as early as 3000 B.C. by the Egyptians and was later used by the Romans
to make eating utensils, glazes on pottery, and even intricate plumbing systems. Lead is
very toxic, however. In fact, the Romans had so much contact with lead that it may have
contributed to the demise of their civilization. Analysis of bones from that era shows
signiﬁcant levels of lead.
Although lead poisoning has been known since at least the second century B.C., the
incidences of this problem have been relatively isolated. However, the widespread use of
tetraethyl lead, (C2H5)4Pb, as an antiknock agent in gasoline increased the lead levels in
our environment in the twentieth century. Concern about the effects of this lead pollution
has caused the U.S. government to require the gradual replacement of the lead in gasoline with other antiknock agents. The largest commercial use of lead (about 1.3 million
tons annually) is for electrodes in the lead storage batteries used in automobiles (see
Section 17.5).
Table 19.13 summarizes some important reactions of the Group 4A elements.

894

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A

TABLE 19.13

Selected Reactions of the Group 4A Elements

Reaction

Comment

M  2X2 S MX4

X2  any halogen molecule;
M  Ge or Sn; Pb gives PbX2

M  O2 S MO2

M  Ge or Sn; high temperatures;
Pb gives PbO or Pb3O4

M  2H S M2  H2

M  Sn or Pb

Lead(II) oxide, known as litharge.

Key Terms
Section 19.1
representative elements
transition metals
lanthanides
actinides
metalloids (semimetals)
metallurgy
liquefaction

Section 19.2
alkali metals
superoxide

Section 19.3
hydride
ionic (saltlike) hydride
covalent hydride
metallic (interstitial) hydride

Section 19.4
alkaline earth metals
hard water
ion exchange
ion-exchange resin
cation-exchange resin

Section 19.5
boranes

For Review
Representative elements
䊉 Chemical properties are determined by their s and p valence-electron conﬁgurations
䊉 Metallic character increases going down the group
䊉 The properties of the ﬁrst element in a group usually differ most from the properties of the other elements in the group due to a signiﬁcant difference in size
• In Group 1A, hydrogen is a nonmetal and the other members of the group are
active metals
• The ﬁrst member of a group forms the strongest p bonds, causing nitrogen and
oxygen to exist as N2 and O2 molecules
Elemental abundances on earth
䊉 Oxygen is the most abundant element, followed by silicon
䊉 The most abundant metals are aluminum and iron, which are found as ores
Group 1A elements (alkali metals)
1
䊉 Have valence conﬁguration ns

䊉 Except for hydrogen, readily lose one electron to form M ions in their compounds with nonmetals


䊉 React vigorously with water to form M and OH ions and hydrogen gas
䊉 Form a series of oxides of the types M2O (oxide), M2O2 (peroxide), and MO2
(superoxide)
• Not all metals form all types of oxide compounds
䊉 Hydrogen forms covalent compounds with nonmetals

䊉 With very active metals, hydrogen forms hydrides that contain the H ion
Group 2A (alkaline earth metals)
2
䊉 Have valence conﬁguration ns
䊉 React less violently with water than alkali metals
䊉 The heavier alkaline earths form nitrides and hydrides
2
䊉 Hard water contains Ca
and Mg2 ions
• Form precipitates with soap
• Usually removed by ion-exchange resins that replace the Ca2 and Mg2 ions
with Na
Group 3A
2
1
䊉 Have valence conﬁguration ns np
䊉 Show increasing metallic character going down the group
䊉 Boron is a nonmetal that forms many types of covalent compounds, including boranes, which are highly electron-deﬁcient and thus are very reactive
䊉 The metals aluminum, gallium, and indium show some covalent tendencies

Questions

895

Group 4A
2
2
䊉 Have valence conﬁguration ns np
䊉 Lighter members are nonmetals; heavier members are metals
• All group members can form covalent bonds to nonmetals
䊉 Carbon forms a huge variety of compounds, most of which are classiﬁed as
organic compounds

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the two most abundant elements by mass in the earth’s crust, oceans,
and atmosphere? Does this make sense? Why? What are the four most abundant
elements by mass in the human body? Does this make sense? Why?
2. What evidence supports putting hydrogen in Group 1A of the periodic table? In
some periodic tables hydrogen is listed separately from any of the groups. In
what ways is hydrogen unlike a typical Group 1A element?
3. What is the valence electron conﬁguration for the alkali metals? List some common properties of alkali metals. How are the pure metals prepared? Predicting
formulas for the compound formed when an alkali metal reacts with oxygen can
be difﬁcult. Why? What is the difference between an oxide, a peroxide, and a
superoxide? Describe how potassium superoxide is used in a self-contained
breathing apparatus. Predict the formulas of the compounds formed when an
alkali metal reacts with F2, S, N2, H2, and H2O.
4. List two major industrial uses of hydrogen. Name the three types of hydrides.
How do they differ from one another?
5. What is the valence electron conﬁguration for alkaline earth metals? List some common properties of alkaline earth metals. How are alkaline earth metals prepared?
What ions are found in hard water? What happens when water is “softened”?
6. Predict the formulas of the compounds formed when an alkaline earth metal reacts with F2, O2, S, N2, H2, and H2O.
7. What is the valence electron conﬁguration for the Group 3A elements? How
does metallic character change as one goes down this group? How are boron
and aluminum different? A12O3 is amphoteric. What does this mean?
8. Predict the formulas of the compounds formed when aluminum reacts with F2,
O2, S, and N2.
9. What is the valence electron conﬁguration for Group 4A elements? Group 4A contains two of the most important elements on earth. What are they, and why are they
so important? How does metallic character change as one goes down Group 4A?
Why is the chemistry of carbon dominated by C¬C bonds, whereas that of silicon
is dominated by Si¬O bonds? What are the two allotropic forms of carbon?
10. List some properties of germanium, tin, and lead. Predict the formulas of the
compounds formed when Ge reacts with F2 and O2.

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
1. Although the earth was formed from the same interstellar material as the sun, there is little elemental hydrogen (H2) in the earth’s
atmosphere. Explain.

2. Many lithium salts are hygroscopic (absorb water), whereas the
corresponding salts of the other alkali metals are not. Explain.
3. How do the acidities of the aqueous solutions of the alkaline earth
metal ions (M2) change in going down the group?
4. What are three-centered bonds?
5. Why is graphite a good lubricant? What advantages does it have
over grease- or oil-based lubricants?
6. What are some of the structural differences between quartz and
amorphous SiO2?

896

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A

7. What type of semiconductor is formed when a Group 3A element
is added as an impurity to Si or Ge?
8. Diagonal relationships in the periodic table exist as well as the
vertical relationships. For example, Be and Al are similar in some
of their properties as are B and Si. Rationalize why these diagonal relationships hold for properties such as size, ionization energy, and electron afﬁnity.
9. Atomic size seems to play an important role in explaining some
of the differences between the ﬁrst element in a group and the
subsequent group elements. Explain.
10. What will be the atomic number of the next alkali metal to be discovered? How would you expect the physical properties of the
next alkali metal to compare with the properties of the other alkali metals summarized in Table 19.4?
11. In most compounds, the solid phase is denser than the liquid phase.
Why isn’t this true for water?
12. Beryllium shows some covalent characteristics in some of its compounds, unlike the other alkaline earth halides. Give a possible
explanation for this phenomenon.

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Group 1A Elements
13. Hydrogen is produced commercially by the reaction of methane
with steam:
CH4 1g2  H2O1g2 ∆ CO1g2  3H2 1g2

a. Calculate ¢H° and ¢S° for this reaction (use the data in Appendix 4).
b. What temperatures will favor product formation at standard conditions? Assume ¢H° and ¢S° do not depend on temperature.
14. The major industrial use of hydrogen is in the production of ammonia by the Haber process:
3H2 1g2  N2 1g2 S 2NH3 1g2

a. Using data from Appendix 4, calculate ¢H°, ¢S°, and ¢G°
for the Haber process reaction.
b. Is the reaction spontaneous at standard conditions?
c. At what temperatures is the reaction spontaneous at standard conditions? Assume ¢H° and ¢S° do not depend on temperature.
15. Name each of the following compounds.
a. Li2O
b. KO2
c. Na2O2
16. Write the formula for each of the following compounds.
a. lithium nitride
c. rubidium hydroxide
b. potassium carbonate
d. sodium hydride
17. Complete and balance the following reactions.
a. Li2O(s)  H2O(l) ¡
b. Na2O2 (s)  H2O(l) ¡
c. LiH(s)  H2O(l) ¡
d. KO2 (s)  H2O(l) ¡
18. Write balanced equations describing the reaction of lithium metal
with each of the following: O2, S8, Cl2, P4, H2, H2O, and HCl.
19. Lithium reacts with acetylene in liquid ammonia to produce LiC2H
(lithium acetylide, LiC ‚CH) and hydrogen gas. Write a balanced
equation for this reaction. What type of reaction is this?

20. The electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride (brine) is an important industrial process for the production of chlorine and sodium
hydroxide. In fact, this process is the second largest consumer of
electricity in the United States, after the production of aluminum.
Write a balanced equation for the electrolysis of aqueous sodium
chloride (hydrogen gas is also produced).

Group 2A Elements
21. Name each of the following compounds.
a. MgCO3
b. BaSO4
c. Sr(OH)2
22. Write the formula for each of the following compounds.
a. calcium nitride
b. beryllium chloride
c. barium hydride
23. One harmful effect of acid rain is the deterioration of structures
and statues made of marble or limestone, both of which are essentially calcium carbonate. The reaction of calcium carbonate
with sulfuric acid yields carbon dioxide, water, and calcium sulfate. Because calcium sulfate is marginally soluble in water, part of
the object is washed away by the rain. Write a balanced chemical
equation for the reaction of sulfuric acid with calcium carbonate.
24. Write balanced equations describing the reaction of Sr with each
of the following: O2, S8, Cl2, P4, H2, H2O, and HCl.
25. Predict the structure of BeF2 in the gas phase. What structure
would you predict for BeF2(s)?
26. The beryllium atom in BeCl2 is electron-deﬁcient (only four valence electrons surround it), which makes it very reactive toward
electron-pair donors such as ammonia. Draw a Lewis structure for
the expected product when BeCl2 reacts with excess ammonia.
27. The U.S. Public Health Service recommends the ﬂuoridation of
water as a means for preventing tooth decay. The recommended
concentration is 1 mg F per liter. The presence of calcium ions
in hard water can precipitate the added ﬂuoride. What is the maximum molarity of calcium ions in hard water if the ﬂuoride concentration is at the USPHS recommended level? (Ksp for CaF2 
4.0  1011 )
28. Slaked lime, Ca(OH)2, is used to soften hard water by removing
calcium ions from hard water through the reaction
Ca1OH2 2 1aq2  Ca2 1aq2  2HCO3 1aq2 S
2CaCO3 1s2  2H2O1l2
Although CaCO3(s) is considered insoluble, some of it does
dissolve in aqueous solutions. Calculate the molar solubility of
CaCO3 in water (Ksp  8.7  109 ) .
29. What mass of barium is produced when molten BaCl2 is electrolyzed by a current of 2.50  105 A for 6.00 h?
30. Electrolysis of an alkaline earth metal chloride using a current of
5.00 A for 748 s deposits 0.471 g of metal at the cathode. What
is the identity of the alkaline earth metal chloride?

Group 3A Elements
31. Write the formula for each of the following compounds.
a. aluminum nitride
b. gallium ﬂuoride
c. gallium sulﬁde
32. Thallium and indium form 1 and 3 oxidation states when in
compounds. Predict the formulas of the possible compounds between thallium and oxygen and between indium and chlorine.
Name the compounds.

897

Additional Exercises
33. Boron hydrides were once evaluated for possible use as rocket
fuels. Complete and balance the following equation for the combustion of diborane.
B2H6  O2 ¡ B1OH2 3
34. Elemental boron is produced by reduction of boron oxide with
magnesium to give boron and magnesium oxide. Write a balanced
equation for this reaction.
35. Ga2O3 is an amphoteric oxide, and In2O3 is a basic oxide. Write
equations for the reactions that illustrate these properties.
36. Aluminum hydroxide is amphoteric and will dissolve in both
acidic and basic solutions. Write balanced chemical equations
representing each process.
37. Write equations describing the reactions of Ga with each of the
following: F2, O2, S8, N2, and HCl.
38. Write a balanced equation describing the reaction of aluminum
metal with concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide.

Group 4A Elements
39. Draw Lewis structures for CF4, GeF4, and GeF62. Predict the
molecular structure (including bond angles), and give the expected
hybridization of the central atom in these three substances. Explain why CF62 does not form.
40. Carbon and sulfur form compounds with the formulas CS2 and
C3S2. Draw Lewis structures and predict the shapes of these two
compounds.
41. Silicon is produced for the chemical and electronics industries
by the following reactions. Give the balanced equation for each
reaction.
a. SiO2 (s)  C(s) S Si(s)  CO(g)
b. Silicon tetrachloride is reacted with very pure magnesium, producing silicon and magnesium chloride.
c. Na2SiF6 (s)  Na(s) S Si(s)  NaF(s)
42. Write equations describing the reactions of Sn with each of the
following: Cl2, O2, and HCl.
43. Why are people advised not to drink hot tap water if their plumbing contains lead solder?
44. Calculate the solubility of Pb(OH)2 (Ksp  1.2  1015 ) in water. Is Pb(OH)2 more or less soluble in acidic solutions? Explain.
45. The fermentation of glucose produces ethanol and carbon dioxide. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
46. Tin forms compounds in the 2 and 4 oxidation states. Therefore, when tin reacts with ﬂuorine, two products are possible.
Write balanced equations for the production of the two tin halide
compounds and name them.
47. The resistivity (a measure of electrical resistance) of graphite is
(0.4 to 5.0)  104 ohm  cm in the basal plane. (The basal plane
is the plane of the six-membered rings of carbon atoms.) The resistivity is 0.2 to 1.0 ohm  cm along the axis perpendicular to the
plane. The resistivity of diamond is 1014 to 1016 ohm  cm and is
independent of direction. How can you account for this behavior
in terms of the structures of graphite and diamond?
48. Silicon carbide (SiC) is an extremely hard substance. Propose a
structure for SiC.

Additional Exercises
49. A 0.250-g chunk of sodium metal is cautiously dropped into a mixture of 50.0 g of water and 50.0 g of ice, both at 0°C. The reaction is
2Na1s2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 2NaOH1aq2  H2 1g2

¢H  368 kJ

Will the ice melt? Assuming the ﬁnal mixture has a speciﬁc heat
capacity of 4.18 J/g  °C, calculate the ﬁnal temperature. The enthalpy of fusion for ice is 6.02 kJ/mol.
50. One of the chemical controversies of the nineteenth century concerned the element beryllium (Be). Berzelius originally claimed
that beryllium was a trivalent element (forming Be3 ions) and
that it gave an oxide with the formula Be2O3. This resulted in a
calculated atomic mass of 13.5 for beryllium. In formulating his
periodic table, Mendeleev proposed that beryllium was divalent
(forming Be2 ions) and that it gave an oxide with the formula
BeO. This assumption gives an atomic mass of 9.0. In 1894, A.
Combes (Comptes Rendus 1894, p. 1221) reacted beryllium with
the anion C5H7O2 and measured the density of the gaseous product. Combes’s data for two different experiments are as follows:

Mass
Volume
Temperature
Pressure

I

II

0.2022 g
22.6 cm3
13°C
765.2 mm Hg

0.2224 g
26.0 cm3
17°C
764.6 mm

If beryllium is a divalent metal, the molecular formula of the
product will be Be(C5H7O2)2; if it is trivalent, the formula will
be Be(C5H7O2)3. Show how Combes’s data help to conﬁrm that
beryllium is a divalent metal.
51. It takes 15 kWh (kilowatt-hours) of electrical energy to produce
1.0 kg of aluminum metal from aluminum oxide by the Hall–Heroult
process. Compare this to the amount of energy necessary to melt
1.0 kg of aluminum metal. Why is it economically feasible to recycle aluminum cans? (The enthalpy of fusion for aluminum metal is
10.7 kJ/mol [1 watt  1 J/s].)
52. Borazine (B3N3H6) has often been called “inorganic” benzene.
Write Lewis structures for borazine. Borazine contains a sixmembered ring of alternating boron and nitrogen atoms with one
hydrogen bonded to each boron and nitrogen.
53. Carbon monoxide is toxic because it bonds much more strongly
to the iron in hemoglobin (Hgb) than does O2. Consider the following reactions and approximate standard free energy changes:
Hgb  O2 ¡ HgbO2

¢G°  70 kJ

Hgb  CO ¡ HgbCO

¢G°  80 kJ

Using these data, estimate the equilibrium constant value at 25°C
for the following reaction:
HgbO2  CO ∆ HgbCO  O2
54. The three most stable oxides of carbon are carbon monoxide (CO),
carbon dioxide (CO2), and carbon suboxide (C3O2). The spaceﬁlling models for these three compounds are

898

Chapter Nineteen The Representative Elements: Groups 1A Through 4A

For each oxide, draw the Lewis structure, predict the molecular
structure, and describe the bonding (in terms of the hybrid orbitals
for the carbon atoms).
55. The overall reaction in the lead storage battery is
Pb1s2  PbO2 1s2  2H 1aq2  2HSO4 1aq2 ¡
2PbSO4 1s2  2H2O1l2

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.
61.
62.

Calculate e at 25°C for this battery when [H2SO4 ]  4.5 M, that
is, [H ]  [HSO4 ]  4.5 M. At 25°C, e°  2.04 V for the lead
storage battery.
The bright yellow light emitted by a sodium vapor lamp consists
of two emission lines at 589.0 and 589.6 nm. What are the frequency and the energy of a photon of light at each of these wavelengths? What are the energies in kJ/mol?
In the 1950s and 1960s, several nations conducted tests of nuclear
warheads in the atmosphere. It was customary following each
test to monitor the concentration of strontium-90 (a radioactive
isotope of strontium) in milk. Why would strontium-90 tend to
accumulate in milk?
The compound BeSO4  4H2O cannot be dehydrated easily by
heating. It dissolves in water to give an acidic solution. Explain
these observations.
The inert-pair effect is sometimes used to explain the tendency of
heavier members of group 3A to exhibit 1 and 3 oxidation
states. What does the inert-pair effect reference? Hint: Consider
the valence electron conﬁguration for group 3A elements.
Assume that element 113 is produced. What is the expected electron conﬁguration for element 113?
Calculate the pH of a 0.050 M Al(NO3)3 solution. The Ka value
for Al(H2O)63 is 1.4  105.
The compound with the formula TlI3 is a black solid. Given the
following standard reduction potentials:
Tl3  2e ¡ Tl

e°  1.25 V



e°  0.55 V





I3  2e ¡ 3I

would you formulate this compound as thallium(III) iodide or
thallium(I) triiodide?
63. How could you determine experimentally whether the compound
Ga2Cl4 contains two gallium(II) ions or one gallium(I) and one
gallium(III) ion? (Hint: Consider the electron conﬁgurations of
the three possible ions.)
64. Tricalcium aluminate, an important component of Portland cement,
is 44.4% calcium and 20.0% aluminum by mass. The remainder
is oxygen.
a. Calculate the empirical formula of tricalcium aluminate.
b. The structure of tricalcium aluminate was not determined until 1975.
The aluminate anion (Al6O1818 ) has the following structure:

= Al
=O

What is the molecular formula of tricalcium aluminate?
c. How would you describe the bonding in the Al6O1818 anion?

65. In Exercise 107 in Chapter 5, the pressure of CO2 in a bottle of
sparkling wine was calculated assuming that the CO2 was insoluble in water. This was a bad assumption. Redo this problem by assuming CO2 obeys Henry’s law. Use the data given in that problem
to calculate the partial pressure of CO2 in the gas phase and the solubility of CO2 in the wine at 25°C. The Henry’s law constant for
CO2 is 3.1  102 mol/L  atm at 25°C with Henry’s law in the
form C  kP, where C is the concentration of the gas in mol/L.
66. The compound Pb3O4 (red lead) contains a mixture of lead(II) and
lead(IV) oxidation states. What is the mole ratio of lead(II) to
lead(IV) in Pb3O4?
67. Lead hydrogen arsenate, an inorganic insecticide used against the
potato beetle, is produced by the following reaction:
Pb1NO3 2 2 1aq2  H3AsO4 1aq2 S PbHAsO4 1s2  HNO3 1aq2

Balance this equation.

Challenge Problems
68. Provide a reasonable estimate for the number of atoms in an
average adult human. Explain your answer. Use the information
given in Table 19.2.
69. Suppose 10.00 g of an alkaline earth metal reacts with 10.0 L of
water to produce 6.10 L of hydrogen gas at 1.00 atm and 25°C.
Identify the metal and determine the pH of the solution.
70. Gallium arsenide, GaAs, has gained widespread use in semiconductor devices that convert light and electrical signals in ﬁberoptic communications systems. Gallium consists of 60.% 69Ga and
40.% 71Ga. Arsenic has only one naturally occurring isotope, 75As.
Gallium arsenide is a polymeric material, but its mass spectrum
shows fragments with the formulas GaAs and Ga2As2. What would
the distribution of peaks look like for these two fragments?
71. Consider dissolving 0.50 mol of CO2(g) to enough water to make
a 1.0-L solution. Determine the pH of this solution, and [CO32 ].
Use data from Appendix 5, Table 5.2.
72. a. Many biochemical reactions that occur in cells require relatively high concentrations of potassium ion (K). The concentration of K in muscle cells is about 0.15 M. The concentration of K in blood plasma is about 0.0050 M. The high internal
concentration in cells is maintained by pumping K from the
plasma. How much work must be done to transport 1.0 mol of
K from the blood to the inside of a muscle cell at 37°C (normal body temperature)?
b. When 1.0 mol of K is transferred from blood to the cells, do
any other ions have to be transported? Why or why not?
c. Cells use the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate, abbreviated
ATP, as a source of energy. Symbolically, this reaction can be
represented as
ATP1aq2  H2O1l2 ¡ ADP1aq2  H2PO4 1aq2

where ADP represents adenosine diphosphate. For this reaction
at 37°C, K  1.7  105. How many moles of ATP must be hydrolyzed to provide the energy for the transport of 1.0 mol of
K? Assume standard conditions for the ATP hydrolysis reaction.
73. EDTA is used as a complexing agent in chemical analysis. Solutions of EDTA, usually containing the disodium salt Na2H2EDTA,
are also used to treat heavy metal poisoning. The equilibrium constant for the following reaction is 1.0  1023:
Pb2 1aq2  H2EDTA2 1aq2 ∆ PbEDTA2 1aq2  2H 1aq2

899

Marathon Problem
O

2C

CH2

EDTA4 

N
O

2C

CH2

CH2

CH2

CO2

ﬁber-optic devices. This material can be synthesized at 900. K
according to the following reaction:

CH2

CO2

In1CH3 2 3 1g2  PH3 1g2 ¡ InP1s2  3CH4 1g2

N

CH2
Ethylenediaminetetraacetate

Calculate [Pb2] at equilibrium in a solution originally 0.0010 M
in Pb2, 0.050 M in H2EDTA2, and buffered at pH  6.00.
74. The compounds CCl4 and H2O do not react with each other. On
the other hand, silicon tetrachloride reacts with water according
to the equation
SiCl4 1l2  2H2O1l2 ¡ SiO2 1s2  4HCl1aq2
Discuss the importance of thermodynamics and kinetics in the
reactivity of water with SiCl4 as compared with its lack of reactivity with CCl4.
75. One reason suggested to account for the instability of long chains
of silicon atoms is that the decomposition involves the transition
state shown below:

The activation energy for such a process is 210 kJ/mol, which is
less than either the Si¬Si or Si¬H energy. Why would a similar
mechanism not be expected to be very important in the decomposition of long carbon chains?
76. From the information on the temperature stability of white and
gray tin given in this chapter, which form would you expect to
have the more ordered structure?
77. Lead forms compounds in the 2 and 4 oxidation states. All
lead(II) halides are known (and are known to be ionic). Only PbF4
and PbCl4 are known among the possible lead(IV) halides. Presumably lead(IV) oxidizes bromide and iodide ions, producing the
lead(II) halide and the free halogen:
PbX4 ¡ PbX2  X2
Suppose 25.00 g of a lead(IV) halide reacts to form 16.12 g of a
lead(II) halide and the free halogen. Identify the halogen.

a. If 2.56 L of In(CH3)3 at 2.00 atm is allowed to react with 1.38 L
of PH3 at 3.00 atm, what mass of InP(s) will be produced
assuming the reaction is 87% efﬁcient?
b. When an electric current is passed through an optoelectronic
device containing InP, the light emitted has an energy of
2.03  1019 J. What is the wavelength of this light and is it
visible to the human eye?
c. The semiconducting properties of InP can be altered by doping.
If a small number of phosphorus atoms are replaced by atoms
with an electron conﬁguration of [Kr]5s24d105p4, is this n-type
or p-type doping?
80. The chemistry of tin(II) ﬂuoride is particularly complex and
demonstrates a wide range of reactivities. For example, in aqueous solutions of tin(II) ﬂuoride containing sodium ﬂuoride, the
predominant species is SnF3.
a. What is the molecular geometry of SnF3 and the hybridization of the tin atom?
b. When tin(II) ﬂuoride is crystallized from aqueous solutions
containing sodium ﬂuoride, one of the products is the polyatomic cluster Na4Sn3F10. Write a balanced chemical reaction
for the formation of Na4Sn3F10 from tin(II) ﬂuoride and NaF.
c. Assuming complete conversion, what mass of Na4Sn3F10 can
be prepared by mixing 15.5 mL of 1.48 M tin(II) ﬂuoride with
35.0 mL of 1.25 M NaF?

Marathon Problem
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

81. Use the symbols of the elements described in the following clues
to ﬁll in the blanks that spell out the name of a famous American
scientist. Although this scientist was better known as a physicist
than as a chemist, the Philadelphia institute that bears his name
does include a biochemistry research facility.
____ ____ ____
(1)

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

78. The heaviest member of the alkaline earth metals is radium (Ra),
a naturally radioactive element discovered by Pierre and Marie
Curie in 1898. Radium was initially isolated from the uranium
ore pitchblende, in which it is present as approximately 1.0 g per
7.0 metric tons of pitchblende. How many atoms of radium can
be isolated from 1.75  108 g of pitchblende (1 metric ton 
1000 kg)? One of the early uses of radium was as an additive to paint
so that watch dials coated with this paint would glow in the dark.
The longest-lived isotope of radium has a half-life of 1.60  103
years. If an antique watch, manufactured in 1925, contains 15.0 mg
of radium, how many atoms of radium will remain in 2025?
79. Indium(III) phosphide is a semiconducting material that has
been frequently used in lasers, light-emitting diodes (LED) and

(2)

____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(1) The oxide of this alkaline earth metal is amphoteric.
(2) You might be surprised to learn that a binary compound of
sodium with this element has the formula NaX3, a compound
used in airbags.
(3) This alkali metal is radioactive.
(4) This element is the alkali metal with the least negative standard reduction potential. Write its symbol in reverse order.
(5) Potash is an oxide of this alkali metal.
(6) This is the only alkali metal that reacts directly with nitrogen
to make a binary compound with formula M3N.
(7) This element is the ﬁrst in Group 3A for which the 1 oxidation state is exhibited in stable compounds. Use only the
second letter of its symbol.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

20

The Representative Elements:
Groups 5A Through 8A

Contents
20.1
20.2
•
•
•
20.3
•
•
•
20.4
20.5
20.6
•
•
•
20.7
•
•
•
20.8

The Group 5A Elements
The Chemistry of Nitrogen
Nitrogen Hydrides
Nitrogen Oxides
Oxyacids of Nitrogen
The Chemistry of
Phosphorus
Phosphorus Oxides and
Oxyacids
Phosphorus in Fertilizers
Phosphorus Halides
The Group 6A Elements
The Chemistry of Oxygen
The Chemistry of Sulfur
Sulfur Oxides
Oxyacids of Sulfur
Other Compounds of Sulfur
The Group 7A Elements
Hydrogen Halides
Oxyacids and Oxyanions
Other Halogen Compounds
The Group 8A Elements

The carnivorous pitcher plant “eats” insects to utilize the nitrogen held in the insect tissue.

I

n Chapter 19 we saw that vertical groups of elements tend to show similar chemical
characteristics because they have identical valence-electron conﬁgurations. Generally,
metallic character increases going down a group, as the valence electrons are found farther
from the nucleus. Also, recall that the most dramatic change in properties occurs after the
ﬁrst group member, mainly because the most dramatic change in size occurs between the
ﬁrst and second group members.
As we proceed from Group 1A to Group 7A, the elements change from active
metals (electron donors) to strong nonmetals (electron acceptors). Thus it is not surprising that the middle groups show the most varied chemistry: Some group members
behave principally as metals, others behave mainly as nonmetals, and some show both
tendencies. The elements in Groups 5A and 6A show great chemical variety and form
many compounds of considerable practical value. The halogens (Group 7A) are nonmetals that are also found in many everyday substances such as household bleach,
photographic ﬁlms, and “automatic” sunglasses. The elements in Group 8A (the noble
gases) are most useful in their elemental forms, but their ability to form compounds,
discovered only within the past 40 years, has provided important tests for the theories
of chemical bonding.
In this chapter we give an overview of the elements in Groups 5A through 8A, concentrating on the chemistry of the most important elements in these groups: nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen, sulfur, and the halogens.
8A

5A
N
P
As
Sb
Bi

20.1

He

5A

6A

7A

N

O

F

Ne

P

S

Cl

Ar

As

Se

Br

Kr

Sb

Te

I

Xe

Bi

Po

At

Rn

The Group 5A Elements

The Group 5A elements (with the valence-electron conﬁguration ns2np3) are prepared as
shown in Table 20.1, and they show remarkably varied chemical properties. As usual,
metallic character increases going down the group, as is apparent from the electronegativity values (Table 20.1). Nitrogen and phosphorus are nonmetals that can gain three electrons to form 3 anions in salts with active metals—for example, magnesium nitride
(Mg3N2) and beryllium phosphide (Be3P2). The chemistry of these two important elements
is discussed in the next two sections.

901

902

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

TABLE 20.1 Selected Physical Properties, Sources, and Methods of Preparation
for the Group 5A Elements
Element

Electronegativity

Nitrogen

3.0

Air

Liquefaction of air

Phosphorus

2.1

Phosphate rock
(Ca3(PO4)2)

2Ca3(PO4)2  6SiO2 S
6CaSiO3  P4O10

Fluorapatite
(Ca5(PO4)3F)

P4O10  10C S
4P  10CO

Sources

Method of
Preparation

Arsenic

2.0

Arsenopyrite
(Fe3As2, FeS)

Heating arsenopyrite in
the absence of air

Antimony

1.9

Stibnite
(Sb2S3)

Roasting Sb2S3 in air
to form Sb2O3 and then
reduction with carbon

Bismuth

1.9

Bismite (Bi2O3),
bismuth glance
(Bi2S3)

Roasting Bi2S3 in air
to form Bi2O3 and then
reduction with carbon

Bismuth and antimony tend to be metallic, readily losing electrons to form cations.
Although these elements have ﬁve valence electrons, so much energy is required to remove all ﬁve that no ionic compounds containing Bi5 or Sb5 ions are known. Three
pentahalides (BiF5, SbCl5, and SbF5) are known, but these are molecular rather than ionic
compounds.
The Group 5A elements can form molecules or ions that involve three, ﬁve, or six
covalent bonds to the Group 5A atom. Examples involving three single bonds are NH3,
PH3, NF3, and AsCl3. Each of these molecules has a lone pair of electrons (and thus can
behave as a Lewis base) and a pyramidal shape as predicted by the VSEPR model (see
Fig. 20.1).
All the Group 5A elements except nitrogen can form molecules with ﬁve covalent bonds (of general formula MX5). Nitrogen cannot form such molecules because of
its small size and lack of available d orbitals. The MX5 molecules have a trigonal bipyramidal shape (see Fig. 20.1) as predicted by the VSEPR model, and the central atom is described as dsp3 hybridized. The MX5 molecules can accept an additional electron pair to
form ionic species containing six covalent bonds. An example is
PF5  F ¡ PF6
where the PF6 anion has an octahedral shape (see Fig. 20.1) and the phosphorus atom is
described as d 2sp3 hybridized.
Although the MX5 molecules have a trigonal bipyramidal structure in the gas
phase, the solids of many of these compounds contain the ions MX 4 and MX6
(Fig. 20.2), where the MX4 cation is tetrahedral (the atom represented by M is
described as sp3 hybridized) and the MX6 anion is octahedral (the atom represented by M is described as d 2sp3 hybridized). Examples are PCl5, which in the solid
state contains PCl4 and PCl6, and AsF3Cl2, which in the solid state contains AsCl4
and AsF6.
As discussed in Section 19.1, the ability of the Group 5A elements to form p bonds
decreases dramatically after nitrogen. This explains why elemental nitrogen exists as N2
molecules, whereas the other elements in the group exist as larger aggregates containing
single bonds. For example, in the gas phase, the elements phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony consist of P4, As4, and Sb4 molecules, respectively.

20.2 The Chemistry of Nitrogen
FIGURE 20.1
The molecules of the types MX 3, MX5, and
MX6 formed by Group 5A elements.

Molecule
Type

Molecular
structure

903

Hybridization
of M
Lone pair

M

X

M

X

MX3
X

sp3

Pyramidal

+

X

X
X
MX5

X

M

M

M

X

X

X

X

X

dsp3
Trigonal
bipyramidal
–

X
X

X
M

X

X
X

X

X

X
MX6

X

X

FIGURE 20.2
The structures of the tetrahedral MX4
and octahedral MX6 ions.

M

M
X

d 2sp3

Octahedral

20.2

The Chemistry of Nitrogen

At the earth’s surface, virtually all elemental nitrogen exists as the N2 molecule with its
very strong triple bond (941 kJ/mol). Because of this high bond strength, the N2 molecule is so unreactive that it can coexist with most other elements under normal conditions without undergoing any appreciable reaction. This property makes nitrogen gas very
useful as a medium for experiments involving substances that react with oxygen or water. Such experiments can be done using an inert-atmosphere box of the type shown in
Fig. 20.3.
The strength of the triple bond in the N2 molecule is important both thermodynamically and kinetically. Thermodynamically, the great stability of the N‚N bond means that
most binary compounds containing nitrogen decompose exothermically to the elements.
For example:
N2O1g2
NO1g2
NO2 1g2
N2H4 1g2
NH3 1g2

¡
¡
¡
¡
¡

N2 1g2  12O2 1g2
1
1
2 N2 1g2  2 O2 1g2
1
2 N2 1g2  O2 1g2
N2 1g2  2H2 1g2
1
3
2 N2 1g2  2 H2 1g2

¢H°
¢H°
¢H°
¢H°
¢H°

 82 kJ
 90 kJ
 34 kJ
 95 kJ
 46 kJ

Of these compounds, only ammonia is thermodynamically more stable than its component
elements. That is, only for ammonia is energy required (endothermic process, positive

904

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

At the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia, a worker
checks samples stored in a liquid nitrogen
tank.

value of ¢H°) to decompose the molecule to its elements. For the remaining molecules,
energy is released when decomposition to the elements occurs as a result of the great stability of N2.
The importance of the thermodynamic stability of N2 can be seen clearly in the power
of nitrogen-based explosives, such as nitroglycerin (C3H5N3O9), which has the structure
The decomposition of nitroglycerin is a
complex process that occurs in many
steps. This equation only summarizes
the stoichiometry of the reaction.

FIGURE 20.3
An inert-atmosphere box used when working with oxygen- or water-sensitive materials. The box is ﬁlled with an inert gas such
as nitrogen, and work is done through the
ports ﬁtted with large rubber gloves.

20.2 The Chemistry of Nitrogen

905

When ignited or subjected to sudden impact, nitroglycerin decomposes very rapidly and
exothermically:
4C3H5N3O9 1l2 ¡ 6N2 1g2  12CO2 1g2  10H2O1g2  O2 1g2  energy

CH3
NO2

NO2

NO2
TNT

An explosion occurs; that is, large volumes of gas are produced in a fast, highly exothermic reaction. Note that 4 moles of liquid nitroglycerin produce 29 (6  12  10  1)
moles of gaseous products. This alone produces a large increase in volume. However, also
note that the products, including N2, are very stable molecules with strong bonds. Their
formation is therefore accompanied by the release of large quantities of energy as heat,
which increases the gaseous volume. The hot, rapidly expanding gases produce a pressure
surge and damaging shock wave.
Pure nitroglycerin is quite dangerous because it explodes with little provocation.
However, in 1867 the Swedish inventor Alfred Nobel found that if nitroglycerin is absorbed in porous silica, it can be handled quite safely. This tremendously important
explosive (see Fig. 20.4), which he called dynamite, earned Nobel a great fortune, which
he subsequently used to establish the Nobel Prizes.
Most high explosives are organic compounds that, like nitroglycerin, contain nitro
(¬NO2 ) groups and produce nitrogen and other gases as products. Another example is
trinitrotoluene, or TNT, a solid at normal temperatures, which decomposes as follows:
2C7H5N3O6 1s2 ¡ 12CO1g2  5H2 1g2  3N2 1g2  2C1s2  energy
Note that 2 moles of solid TNT produce 20 moles of gaseous products plus energy.

Sample Exercise 20.1

Decomposition of NH4NO2
When ammonium nitrite is heated, it decomposes to nitrogen gas and water. Calculate the
volume of N2 gas produced from 1.00 g of solid NH4NO2 at 250°C and 1.00 atm.
Solution
The decomposition reaction is
NH4NO2 1s2 ¡ N2 1g2  2H2O1g2
Heat

Using the molar mass of NH4NO2 (64.05 g/mol), we ﬁrst calculate the moles of NH4NO2:
1.00 g NH4NO2 

1 mol NH4NO2
 1.56  10 2 mol NH4NO2
64.05 g NH4NO2

Since 1 mol N2 is produced for each mole of NH4NO2, 1.56  10 2 mol N2 will be produced in the given experiment. We can calculate the volume of N2 from the ideal gas law:
PV  nRT
In this case we have
P  1.00 atm
n  1.56  10 2 mol
R  0.08206 L  atm/K  mol
T  250  273  523 K
FIGURE 20.4
Chemical explosives are used to demolish a
building in Miami, Florida.

and the volume of N2 is
L  atm
11.56  10 2 mol2 a0.08206
b 1523 K2
nRT
K  mol
V

P
1.00 atm
 0.670 L
See Exercises 20.17 and 20.18.

906

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A
The effect of bond strength on the kinetics of reactions involving the N2 molecule is illustrated by the synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen, a reaction we have discussed many times before. Because a large quantity of energy is required to disrupt the N‚N
bond, the ammonia synthesis reaction has a negligible rate at room temperature, even though
the equilibrium constant is very large (K  10 6 ) at 25°C. Of course, the most direct way to
increase the rate is to raise the temperature, but since the reaction is very exothermic, that is,

Impure
N2, H2

Pure
N2, H2

N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ¡ 2NH3 1g2
Unreacted N2, H2

Unwanted trace
gases removed

Catalytic
reactors

NH3

Cooling
chamber
Liquid NH3
(yield 20%
on each
cycle)

FIGURE 20.5
A schematic diagram of the Haber process
for the manufacture of ammonia.

Nodules on the roots of pea plants contain
nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria.

¢H°  92 kJ

the value of K decreases signiﬁcantly with a temperature increase (at 500°C, K  102 ).
Obviously, the kinetics and the thermodynamics of this reaction are in opposition. A
compromise must be reached: high pressure to force the equilibrium to the right and high
temperature to produce a reasonable rate. The Haber process for manufacturing ammonia illustrates this compromise (see Fig. 20.5). The process is carried out at a pressure of
about 250 atm and a temperature of approximately 400°C. Even higher temperatures would
be required except that a catalyst, consisting of a solid iron oxide mixed with small amounts
of potassium oxide and aluminum oxide, is used to facilitate the reaction.
Nitrogen is essential to living systems. The problem with nitrogen is not one of supply—
we are surrounded by it—but of changing it from inert N2 molecules to a form usable by
plants and animals. The process of transforming N2 to other nitrogen-containing compounds
is called nitrogen ﬁxation. The Haber process is one example of nitrogen ﬁxation. The ammonia produced can be applied to the soil as a fertilizer, since plants can readily employ the
nitrogen in ammonia to make the nitrogen-containing biomolecules essential for their growth.
Nitrogen ﬁxation also results from the high-temperature combustion process in automobile engines. The nitrogen in the air drawn into the engine reacts at a signiﬁcant rate
with oxygen to form nitric oxide (NO), which further reacts with oxygen from the air to
form nitrogen dioxide (NO2). This nitrogen dioxide, which is an important contributor to
photochemical smog in many urban areas (see Section 12.8), eventually reacts with moisture in the air and reaches the soil to form nitrate salts, which are plant nutrients.
Nitrogen ﬁxation also occurs naturally. For example, lightning provides the energy to
disrupt N2 and O2 molecules in the air, producing highly reactive nitrogen and oxygen
atoms that attack other N2 and O2 molecules to form nitrogen oxides that eventually become nitrates. Although lightning traditionally has been credited with forming about 10%
of the total ﬁxed nitrogen, recent studies indicate that lightning may account for as much
as half the ﬁxed nitrogen available on earth. Another natural nitrogen ﬁxation process is
provided by bacteria that reside in the root nodules of plants such as beans, peas, and alfalfa. These nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria readily allow the conversion of nitrogen to ammonia
and other nitrogen-containing compounds useful to plants. The efﬁciency of these bacteria is intriguing: They produce ammonia at soil temperature and 1 atm of pressure, whereas
the Haber process requires severe conditions of 400°C and 250 atm. For obvious reasons,
researchers are studying these bacteria intensively.
When plants and animals die, they decompose, and the elements they consist of are
returned to the environment. In the case of nitrogen, the return of the element to the atmosphere as nitrogen gas, called denitriﬁcation, is carried out by bacteria that change
nitrates to nitrogen. The complex nitrogen cycle is summarized in Fig. 20.6. It has been
estimated that as much as 10 million tons per year more nitrogen is currently being ﬁxed
by natural and human processes than is being returned to the atmosphere. This ﬁxed nitrogen is accumulating in the soil, lakes, rivers, and oceans, where it can promote the
growth of algae and other undesirable organisms.

Nitrogen Hydrides
By far the most important hydride of nitrogen is ammonia (NH3). A toxic, colorless gas with
a pungent odor, ammonia is manufactured in huge quantities (30 billion pounds per year),
mainly for use in fertilizers.

20.2 The Chemistry of Nitrogen

N2 in the
atmosphere
N-fixing
bacteria

Lightning

Denitrifying
bacteria

Plant and
animal protein

FIGURE 20.6
The nitrogen cycle. To be used by plants
and animals, nitrogen must be converted
from N2 to nitrogen-containing compounds,
such as nitrates, ammonia, and proteins.
The nitrogen is returned to the atmosphere
by natural decay processes.

907

Nitrates

Decay
processes

Bacteria

Ammonia

Nitrites
Bacteria

The pyramidal ammonia molecule (see Fig. 20.1) has a lone pair of electrons on the
nitrogen atom and polar N¬H bonds. This structure leads to a high degree of intermolecular interaction by hydrogen bonding in the liquid state and produces an unusually high
boiling point (33.4°C) for a substance of such low molar mass. Note, however, that the
hydrogen bonding in liquid ammonia is clearly not as important as that in liquid water,
which has about the same molar mass but a much higher boiling point. The water molecule has two polar bonds involving hydrogen and two lone pairs—the right combination
for optimal hydrogen bonding—in contrast to the one lone pair and three polar bonds of
the ammonia molecule.
As we saw in Chapter 14, ammonia behaves as a base and reacts with acids to produce ammonium salts. For example,
NH3 1g2  HCl1g2 ¡ NH4Cl1s2
A second nitrogen hydride of major importance is hydrazine (N2H4). The Lewis structure of hydrazine is

indicating that each nitrogen atom should be sp3 hybridized with bond angles close to
109.5 degrees (the tetrahedral angle), since the nitrogen atom is surrounded by four electron pairs. The observed structure with bond angles of 112 degrees (see Fig. 20.7) agrees
reasonably well with these predictions. Hydrazine, a colorless liquid with an ammonialike odor, freezes at 2°C and boils at 113.5°C. This boiling point is quite high for a compound with a molar mass of 32 g/mol; this suggests that considerable hydrogen bonding
must occur among the polar hydrazine molecules.
Hydrazine is a powerful reducing agent that has been used widely as a rocket propellant. For example, its reaction with oxygen is highly exothermic:

H
H
N
H
H

N
112°

FIGURE 20.7
The molecular structure of hydrazine
(N2H4 ). This arrangement minimizes the
repulsion between the lone pairs on the
nitrogen atoms by placing them on opposite sides.

N2H4 1l2  O2 1g2 ¡ N2 1g2  2H2O1g2

¢H°  622 kJ

Since hydrazine also reacts vigorously with the halogens, ﬂuorine is often used instead of
oxygen as the oxidizer in rocket engines. Substituted hydrazines, where one or more of
the hydrogen atoms are replaced by other groups, are also useful rocket fuels. For example, monomethylhydrazine,

908

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A
is used with the oxidizer dinitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) to power the U.S. space shuttle orbiter. The reaction is
5N2O4 1l2  4N2H3 1CH3 21l2 ¡ 12H2O1g2  9N2 1g2  4CO2 1g2
Because of the large number of gaseous molecules produced and the exothermic nature
of this reaction, a very high thrust per mass of fuel is achieved. The reaction is also selfstarting—it begins immediately when the fuels are mixed—which is a useful property for
rocket engines that must be started and stopped frequently.

Heats of Reaction from Bond Energies

Sample Exercise 20.2

Using the bond energies in Table 8.4, calculate the approximate value of ¢H for the
reaction between gaseous monomethylhydrazine and dinitrogen tetroxide:
5N2O4 1g2  4N2H3 1CH3 21g2 ¡ 12H2O1g2  9N2 1g2  4CO2 1g2
The bonding in N2O4 is described by resonance structures that predict that the N¬O bonds
are intermediate in strength between single and double bonds (assume an average N¬O
bond energy of 440 kJ/mol).
Solution
To calculate H for this reaction, we must compare the energy necessary to break the
bonds of the reactants and the energy released by formation of the bonds in the products:

Breaking bonds requires energy (positive sign), and forming bonds releases energy (negative sign). As summarized in the following table,
¢H  121.1  103 kJ2  126.1  103 kJ2  5.0  103 kJ
The reaction is highly exothermic.

Bonds Broken

Energy Required (kJ/mol)

5  4  20 N“O
5  4  9 N¬N
4  3  12 N¬H
4  3  12 C¬H
4  1  4 C¬N

20
9
12
12
4
Total







440
160
391
413
305







8.8
1.4
4.7
5.0
1.2
21.1

 103
 103
 103
 103
 103
 103

Bonds Formed

Energy Released (kJ/mol)

12  2  24 O¬H
9 N‚N
4  2  8 C“O

24  467  1.12  104
9  941  8.5  103
8  799  6.4  103

Total

26.1  103

See Exercise 20.19.
The use of hydrazine as a rocket propellant is a rather specialized application. The
main industrial use of hydrazine is as a “blowing” agent in the manufacture of plastics.
Hydrazine decomposes to form nitrogen gas, which causes foaming in the liquid plastic,
which results in a porous texture. Another major use of hydrazine is in the production of

20.2 The Chemistry of Nitrogen

909

agricultural pesticides. Of the many hundreds of hydrazine derivatives (substituted hydrazines) that have been tested, 40 are used as fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, and
plant growth regulators.
The manufacture of hydrazine involves the oxidation of ammonia by the hypochlorite ion in basic solution:
2NH3 1aq2  OCl  1aq2 ¡ N2H4 1aq2  Cl  1aq2  H2O1l2
Although this reaction looks straightforward, the actual process involves many steps and
requires high pressure, high temperature, and catalysis to optimize the yield of hydrazine
in the face of many competing reactions.

Nitrogen Oxides
Blowing agents such as hydrazine, which
forms nitrogen gas on decomposition, are
used to produce porous plastics like these
styrofoam products.

Nitrogen forms a series of oxides in which it has an oxidation state from 1 to 5, as
shown in Table 20.2.
Dinitrogen monoxide (N2O), more commonly called nitrous oxide or “laughing gas,”
has an inebriating effect and has been used as a mild anesthetic by dentists. Because of
its high solubility in fats, nitrous oxide is used widely as a propellant in aerosol cans of
whipped cream. It is dissolved in the liquid in the can at high pressure and forms bubbles
that produce foaming as the liquid is released from the can. A signiﬁcant amount of N2O
exists in the atmosphere, mostly produced by soil microorganisms, and its concentration

TABLE 20.2

Some Common Nitrogen Compounds

Oxidation
State of
Nitrogen

Compound

Formula

3

Ammonia

NH3

2

Hydrazine

N2H4

1

Hydroxylamine

NH2OH

Nitrogen

N2

1

Dinitrogen monoxide
(nitrous oxide)

N2O

2

Nitrogen monoxide
(nitric oxide)

NO

3

Dinitrogen trioxide

N2O3

4

Nitrogen dioxide

NO2

5

Nitric acid

HNO3

0

Lewis
Structure*

*In some cases, additional resonance structures are needed to fully describe the electron distribution.

910

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A
appears to be gradually increasing. Because it can strongly absorb infrared radiation,
nitrous oxide plays a small but probably signiﬁcant role in controlling the earth’s temperature in the same way that atmospheric carbon dioxide and water vapor do (see the
discussion of the greenhouse effect in Section 6.5). Some scientists fear that the rapid decrease of tropical rain forests resulting from development in countries such as Brazil will
signiﬁcantly affect the rate of production of N2O by soil organisms and thus will have important effects on the earth’s temperature.
In the laboratory, nitrous oxide is prepared by the thermal decomposition of ammonium nitrate:
NH4NO3 1s2 ¡ N2O1g2  2H2O1g2
Heat

Do not attempt this experiment unless
you have the proper safety equipment.

This experiment must be done carefully because ammonium nitrate can explode. In fact, one
of the greatest industrial disasters in U.S. history occurred in 1947 in Texas, when a ship
loaded with ammonium nitrate for use as fertilizer exploded and killed nearly 600 people.
Nitrogen monoxide (NO), commonly called nitric oxide, is a colorless gas under normal conditions that can be produced in the laboratory by reaction of 6 M nitric acid with
copper metal:
8H  1aq2  2NO3  1aq2  3Cu1s2 ¡ 3Cu 2 1aq2  4H2O1l2  2NO1g2
When this reaction is run in the air, the nitric oxide is immediately oxidized to brown nitrogen dioxide (NO2).
Although nitric oxide is toxic when inhaled, it has been shown to be produced in certain tissues of the human body, where it behaves as a neurotransmitter. Current research
indicates that nitric oxide plays a role in regulating blood pressure, blood clotting, and the
muscle changes that allow erection of the penis in males.
Since the NO molecule has an odd number of electrons, it is most conveniently described in terms of the molecular orbital model. The molecular orbital energy-level diagram is shown in Fig. 20.8. Note that the NO molecule is paramagnetic and should have
a bond order of 2.5, a prediction that is supported by experimental observations. Since the
NO molecule has one high-energy electron, it is not surprising that it can be rather easily oxidized to form NO, the nitrosyl ion. Because an antibonding electron is removed
in going from NO to NO, the ion should have a stronger bond (the predicted bond order is 3) than the molecule. This is borne out by experiment. The bond lengths and bond

Atomic orbitals
of oxygen

A copper penny reacts with nitric acid to
produce NO gas, which is immediately
oxidized in air to brown NO2.

Molecular orbitals
in NO

Atomic orbitals
of nitrogen

σ2p*
π2p*

π2p*
2p

2p
π2p

E

π2p
σ2p

σ2s*

FIGURE 20.8
The molecular orbital energy-level diagram
for nitric oxide (NO). The bond order is 2.5,
or (8  3)兾2.

2s

2s

σ2s

20.2 The Chemistry of Nitrogen

911

TABLE 20.3 Comparison of the Bond Lengths and Bond
Energies for Nitric Oxide and the Nitrosyl Ion

Bond length (pm)
Bond energy (kJ/mol)
Bond order (predicted by MO model)

NO

NO

115
630
2.5

109
1020
3

energies for nitric oxide and the nitrosyl ion are shown in Table 20.3. The nitrosyl ion is
formed when nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide are dissolved in concentrated sulfuric acid:
NO1g2  NO2 1g2  3H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ 2NO  1aq2  3HSO4  1aq2  H3O  1aq2
The ionic compound NO HSO4 can be isolated from this solution.
Nitric oxide is thermodynamically unstable and decomposes to nitrous oxide and nitrogen dioxide:
3NO1g2 ¡ N2O1g2  NO2 1g2
Production of NO2 by power plants
and automobiles leads to smog (see
Section 12.8).

Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) is also an odd-electron molecule and has a V-shaped structure.
The brown, paramagnetic NO2 molecule readily dimerizes to form dinitrogen tetroxide,
2NO2 1g2 ∆ N2O4 1g2

which is diamagnetic and colorless. The value of the equilibrium constant is 1 for this
process at 55°C, and since the dimerization is exothermic, K decreases as the temperature
increases.

Sample Exercise 20.3

Molecular Orbital Description of NO
Use the molecular orbital model to predict the bond order and magnetism of the NO ion.
Solution
Using the energy-level diagram for the NO molecule in Fig. 20.8, we can see that NO
has one more antibonding electron than NO. Thus there will be unpaired electrons in the
two p2p* orbitals, and NO  will be paramagnetic with a bond order of (8  4) 2, or 2.
Note that the bond in the NO  ion is weaker than that in the NO molecule.
See Exercises 20.23 and 20.24.
The least common of the nitrogen oxides are dinitrogen trioxide (N2O3), a blue liquid that readily dissociates into gaseous nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide, and dinitrogen
pentoxide (N2O5), which under normal conditions is a solid that is best viewed as a mixture of NO2 and NO3  ions. Although N2O5 molecules do exist in the gas phase, they
readily dissociate to nitrogen dioxide and oxygen:
2N2O5 1g2 ∆ 4NO2 1g2  O2 1g2
This reaction follows ﬁrst-order kinetics, as was discussed in Section 12.4.

Oxyacids of Nitrogen
Nitric acid is an important industrial chemical (almost 10 million tons is produced annually) used in the manufacture of many products, such as nitrogen-based explosives and
ammonium nitrate for use as fertilizer.

912

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Nitrous Oxide: Laughing Gas That Propels Whipped
Cream and Cars
itrous oxide (N2O), more properly called dinitrogen
monoxide, is a compound with many interesting uses.
It was discovered in 1772 by Joseph Priestley (who is
also given credit for discovering oxygen gas), and its
intoxicating effects were noted almost immediately. In
1798, the 20-year-old Humphry Davy became director of
the Pneumatic Institute, which was set up to investigate
the medical effects of various gases. Davy tested the effects of N2O on himself, reporting that after inhaling
16 quarts of the gas in 7 minutes, he became “absolutely
intoxicated.”
Over the next century “laughing gas,” as nitrous oxide
became known, was developed as an anesthetic, particularly
for dental procedures. Nitrous oxide is still used as an
anesthetic, although it has been largely replaced by more
modern drugs.

N

Nitric acid is produced commercially by the oxidation of ammonia in the Ostwald
process (see Fig. 20.9). In the ﬁrst step of this process, ammonia is oxidized to nitric
oxide:

NH3

4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2

Oxidation at
900°C with
Pt – Rh catalyst

4NH3 1g2  6NO1g2 ¡ 5N2 1g2  6H2O1g2

HNO3

FIGURE 20.9
The Ostwald process.

NO byproduct

Oxidation with
O2 at 25°C

Dissolved
in H2O

¢H°  905 kJ

Although this reaction is highly exothermic, it is very slow at 25°C. There is also a side
reaction between nitric oxide and ammonia:

NO

NO2

One major use of nitrous oxide today is as the propellant
in cans of “instant” whipped cream. The high solubility of
N2O in the whipped cream mixture makes it an excellent
candidate for pressurizing the cans of whipped cream.
Another current use of nitrous oxide is to produce “instant horsepower” for hot rods and street racers. Because the
reaction of N2O with O2 to form NO actually absorbs heat,
this reaction has a cooling effect when placed in the fuel
mixture in an automobile engine. This cooling effect lowers
combustion temperatures, thus allowing the fuel–air mixture
to be signiﬁcantly more dense (the density of a gas is inversely proportional to temperature). This effect can produce
a burst of additional power in excess of 200 horsepower. Because engines are not designed to run steadily at such high
power levels, the nitrous oxide is injected from a tank when
extra power is desired.

which is particularly undesirable because it traps the nitrogen as very unreactive N2 molecules. To speed up the desired reaction and minimize the effects of the competing reaction, the ammonia oxidation is carried out using a catalyst of a platinum–rhodium alloy
heated to 900°C. Under these conditions, there is a 97% conversion of the ammonia to
nitric oxide.
In the second step, nitric oxide reacts with oxygen to produce nitrogen dioxide:
2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

¢H°  113 kJ

This oxidation reaction has a rate that decreases with increasing temperature. Because of
this very unusual behavior, the reaction is carried out at 25°C and is kept at this temperature by cooling with water.
The third step in the Ostwald process is the absorption of nitrogen dioxide by water:
3NO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2HNO3 1aq2  NO1g2

¢H°  139 kJ

The gaseous NO produced in this reaction is recycled to be oxidized to NO2. The aqueous
nitric acid from this process is about 50% HNO3 by mass, which can be increased to 68%
by distillation to remove some of the water. The maximum concentration attainable this way
is 68% because nitric acid and water form an azeotrope at this concentration. The solution

20.3 The Chemistry of Phosphorus
H
~105°
O

FIGURE 20.10
(a) The molecular structure of HNO3.
(b) The resonance structures of HNO3.

An azeotrope is a solution that, like a
pure liquid, distills at a constant temperature without a change in composition.

913

O
O

O
N 120°

H

O

N

H

O

N

O

O
(a)

O

(b)

can be further concentrated to 95% HNO3 by treatment with concentrated sulfuric acid,
which strongly absorbs water; H2SO4 is often used as a dehydrating (water-removing) agent.
Nitric acid is a colorless, fuming liquid 1bp  83°C2 with a pungent odor; it decomposes in sunlight via the following reaction:
4HNO3 1l2 ¡ 4NO2 1g2  2H2O1l2  O2 1g2
hv

As a result, nitric acid turns yellow as it ages because of the dissolved nitrogen dioxide.
The common laboratory reagent known as concentrated nitric acid is 15.9 M HNO3 (70.4%
HNO3 by mass) and is a very strong oxidizing agent. The resonance structures and molecular structure of HNO3 are shown in Fig. 20.10. Note that the hydrogen is bound to an
oxygen atom rather than to nitrogen, as the formula suggests.
Nitric acid reacts with metal oxides, hydroxides, and carbonates and with other ionic
compounds containing basic anions to form nitrate salts. For example,
Ca1OH2 2 1s2  2HNO3 1aq2 ¡ Ca1NO3 2 2 1aq2  2H2O1l2
Nitrate salts are generally very soluble in water.
Nitrous acid (HNO2) is a weak acid,

HNO2 1aq2 ∆ H  1aq2  NO2  1aq2

Ka  4.0  10 4

that forms pale yellow nitrite (NO2  ) salts. In contrast to nitrates, which are often used
as explosives, nitrites are quite stable even at high temperatures. Nitrites are usually prepared by bubbling equal numbers of moles of nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide into the
appropriate aqueous solution of a metal hydroxide. For example,
NO1g2  NO2 1g2  2NaOH1aq2 ¡ 2NaNO2 1aq2  H2O1l2

20.3
Visualization: Barking Dogs:
Reaction of Phosphorus

The Chemistry of Phosphorus

Although phosphorus lies directly below nitrogen in Group 5A of the periodic table, its
chemical properties are signiﬁcantly different from those of nitrogen. The differences arise
mainly from four factors: nitrogen’s ability to form much stronger p bonds, the greater
electronegativity of nitrogen, the larger size of the phosphorus atom, and the availability
of empty valence d orbitals on phosphorus.
The chemical differences are apparent in the elemental forms of nitrogen and
phosphorus. In contrast to the diatomic form of elemental nitrogen, which is stabilized
by strong p bonds, there are several solid forms of phosphorus, all containing aggregates
of atoms. White phosphorus, which contains discrete tetrahedral P4 molecules [see
Fig. 20.11(a)], is very reactive and bursts into ﬂames on contact with air (it is said to be
pyrophoric). To prevent this, white phosphorus is commonly stored under water. White
phosphorus is quite toxic, and the P4 molecules are very damaging to tissue, particularly
the cartilage and bones of the nose and jaw. The much less reactive forms known as black
phosphorus and red phosphorus are network solids (see Section 10.5). Black phosphorus
has a regular crystalline structure [Fig. 20.11(b)], but red phosphorus is amorphous and
is thought to consist of chains of P4 units [Fig. 20.11(c)]. Red phosphorus can be obtained

914

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Phosphorus: An Illuminating Element
he elemental form of phosphorus was discovered by accident in 1669 by German alchemist Henning Brand
when he heated dried urine with sand (alchemists often
investigated the chemistry of body ﬂuids in an attempt to
better understand the “stuff of life”). When Brand passed
the resulting vapors through water, he was able to isolate the
form of elemental phosphorus known as white phosphorus
(contains P4 molecules). The name phosphorus is derived
from the Latin phos, meaning “light,” and phorus, meaning
“bearing.” It seems that when Brand stored the solid white
phosphorus in a sealed bottle, it glowed in the dark! This
effect—a glow that persists even after the light source has
been removed—came to be called phosphorescence. Interestingly, the term phosphorescence is derived from the name
of an element that really does not phosphoresce. The glow
that Brand saw actually was the result of a reaction of oxygen
from the air on the surface of white phosphorus. If isolated

T

completely from air, phosphorus does not glow in the dark
after being irradiated.
After its discovery, phosphorus became quite a novelty
in the seventeenth century. People would deposit a ﬁlm of
phosphorus on their faces and hands so that they would glow
in the dark.* This fascination was short-lived—painful,
slow-healing burns result from the spontaneous reaction of
phosphorus with oxygen from the air.
The greatest consumer use of phosphorus compounds
concerns the chemistry of matches. Two kinds of matches
are currently available—strike-anywhere matches and safety

*An interesting reference to white phosphorus can be found in the
Sherlock Holmes mystery, The Hound of the Baskervilles, where a large
dog was coated with white phosphorus to scare Baskerville family
members to death.

by heating white phosphorus in the absence of oxygen at 1 atm. Black phosphorus is
obtained from either white or red phosphorus by heating at high pressures.
Even though phosphorus has a lower electronegativity than nitrogen, it will form phosphides (ionic substances containing the P 3 anion) such as Na3P and Ca3P2. Phosphide
salts react vigorously with water to produce phosphine (PH3), a toxic, colorless gas:
2Na3P1s2  6H2O1l2 ¡ 2PH3 1g2  6Na  1aq2  6OH  1aq2

Phosphine is analogous to ammonia, although it is a much weaker base (Kb  10 26 ) and
much less soluble in water. Because phosphine has a relatively small afﬁnity for protons,
phosphonium (PH4) salts are very uncommon and not very stable—only PH4I, PH4Cl,
and PH4Br are known.
Phosphine has the Lewis structure

and a pyramidal molecular structure, as we would predict from the VSEPR model. However, it has bond angles of 94 degrees, rather than 107 degrees, as found in the ammonia

FIGURE 20.11
(a) The P4 molecule found in white phosphorus. (b) The crystalline network structure of black phosphorus. (c) The chain
structure of red phosphorus.

(a)

(b)

(c)

20.3 The Chemistry of Phosphorus

915

matches. Both types of matches use phosphorus (in different
forms) to help initiate a ﬂame at the match head. The
chemistry of matches is quite interesting. The tip of a strikeanywhere match is made from a mixture of powdered glass,
binder, and tetraphosphorus trisulﬁde (P4S3). When the match
is struck, friction ignites the combustion reaction of P4S3:
P4S3 1s2  6O2 1g2 ¡ P4O6 1g2  3SO2 1g2
The heat from this reaction causes an oxidizing agent such
as potassium chlorate to decompose:

The phosphorus in safety matches helps ignite the
ﬂame in the match.

2KClO3 1s2 ¡ 2KCl1s2  3O2 1g2
which in turn causes solid sulfur to melt and react with
oxygen, producing sulfur dioxide and more heat. This then
ignites a parafﬁn wax that helps to “light” the wooden stem
of the match.
The chemistry of a safety match is quite similar, but the
location of the reactants is different. The phosphorus needed
to initiate all the reactions is found on the striking surface
of the box. Thus, in theory, a safety match is able to ignite

only when used with the box. For a safety match, the striking surface contains red phosphorus, which is easily converted to white phosphorus by the friction of the match head
on the striking surface. White phosphorus ignites spontaneously in air and generates enough heat to initiate all the
other reactions to ignite the match stem.
4P 1red2  energy 1friction2 ¡
P4 1s21white2  5O2 1g2 ¡ P4O10 1s2  heat

molecule. The reasons for this are complex, and we will simply regard phosphine as an
exception to the simple version of the VSEPR model that we use.

Phosphorus Oxides and Oxyacids

The terminal oxygens are the nonbridging
oxygen atoms.

Phosphorus reacts with oxygen to form oxides in which it has oxidation states of 5 and
3. The oxide P4O6 is formed when elemental phosphorus is burned in a limited supply
of oxygen, and P4O10 is produced when the oxygen is in excess. These oxides, as shown
in Fig. 20.12, can be pictured as being constructed by adding oxygen atoms to the fundamental P4 structure. The intermediate states, P4O7, P4O8, and P4O9, which contain one,
two, and three terminal oxygen atoms, respectively, are also known.
O

P

P
P
Limited
O2

FIGURE 20.12
The structures of P4O6 and P4O10.

P4O6

P
P

Excess
O2

P4O10

916

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A
Tetraphosphorus decoxide (P4O10), which was formerly represented as P2O5, has a
great afﬁnity for water and thus is a powerful dehydrating agent. For example, it can be
used to convert HNO3 and H2SO4 to their parent oxides, N2O5 and SO3, respectively.
When tetraphosphorus decoxide dissolves in water, phosphoric acid (H3PO4), also
called orthophosphoric acid, is produced:
P4O10 1s2  6H2O1l2 ¡ 4H3PO4 1aq2

The mineral hydroxyapatite, Ca5(PO4)3OH,
the principal component of tooth enamel,
can be converted to ﬂuorapatite by reaction with ﬂuoride. Fluoride ions added to
drinking water and toothpaste help prevent tooth decay because ﬂuorapatite is
less soluble in the acids of the mouth
than hydroxyapatite.

Pure phosphoric acid is a white solid that melts at 42°C. Aqueous phosphoric acid is a
much weaker acid (Ka1  10 2 ) than nitric acid or sulfuric acid and is a poor oxidizing
agent.
Phosphate minerals are the main source of phosphoric acid. Unlike nitrogen, phosphorus is found in nature exclusively in a combined state, principally as the PO4 3 ion
in phosphate rock, which is mainly calcium phosphate, Ca3(PO4)2, and ﬂuorapatite,
Ca5(PO4)3F. Fluorapatite can be converted to phosphoric acid by grinding up the phosphate rock and forming a slurry with sulfuric acid:
Ca5 1PO4 2 3F1s2  5H2SO4 1aq2  10H2O1l2
¡ HF1aq2  5CaSO4  2H2O1s2  3H3PO4 1aq2
(A similar reaction can be written for the conversion of calcium phosphate.) The solid
product CaSO4  2H2O, called gypsum, is used to manufacture wallboard for the construction of buildings.
The process just described, called the wet process, produces only impure phosphoric
acid. In another procedure, phosphate rock, sand (SiO2), and coke are heated in an electric furnace to form white phosphorus:
12Ca5 1PO4 2 3F  43SiO2  90C ¡ 9P4  90CO  2013CaO  2SiO2 2  3SiF4
The white phosphorus obtained is burned in air to form tetraphosphorus decoxide, which
is then combined with water to give phosphoric acid.
Phosphoric acid easily undergoes condensation reactions, where a molecule of water is eliminated in the joining of two molecules of acid:

The product (H4P2O7) is called pyrophosphoric acid. Further heating produces polymers,
such as tripolyphosphoric acid (H5P3O10), which has the structure
O
H

O

P

O
O

P

O
O

P

O

O

O

H

H

H

O

H

The sodium salt of tripolyphosphoric acid is widely used in detergents because the P3O10 5
anion can form complexes with metal ions such as Mg2 and Ca2, which would otherwise interfere with detergent action.

Sample Exercise 20.4

Structure of Phosphoric Acid
What are the molecular structure and the hybridization of the central atom of the phosphoric
acid molecule?

20.3 The Chemistry of Phosphorus

H
H

FIGURE 20.13
(a) The structure of phosphorous acid
(H3PO3). (b) The structure of hypophosphorous acid (H3PO2).

O

P

917

H
O

H

P

O

O

H

H

(a)

O

(b)

Solution
In the phosphoric acid molecule, the hydrogen atoms are attached to oxygens, and the
Lewis structure is as shown below. Thus the phosphorus atom is surrounded by four effective pairs, which are arranged tetrahedrally. The atom is described as sp3 hybridized.
O
H

O

P

O

O

O
H
Lewis structure

H

H
H
P

O

O
O
H

See Exercises 20.27 and 20.28.
When P4O6 is placed in water, phosphorous acid (H3PO3) is formed [Fig. 20.13(a)].
Although the formula suggests a triprotic acid, phosphorous acid is a diprotic acid. The
hydrogen atom bonded directly to the phosphorus atom is not acidic in aqueous solution;
only those hydrogen atoms bonded to the oxygen atoms in H3PO3 can be released as protons.
A third oxyacid of phosphorus is hypophosphorous acid (H3PO2) [Fig. 20.13(b)],
which is a monoprotic acid.
Unshared
electron pair
P
X

X
X
(a)

X
X
P

X

X
X
(b)

FIGURE 20.14
Structures of the phosphorus halides.
(a) The PX3 compounds have pyramidal
molecules. (b) The gaseous and liquid
phases of the PX5 compounds are composed of trigonal bipyramidal molecules.

Phosphorus in Fertilizers
Phosphorus is essential for plant growth. Although most soil contains large amounts of
phosphorus, it is often present as insoluble minerals, which makes it inaccessible to plants.
Soluble phosphate fertilizers are manufactured by treating phosphate rock with sulfuric
acid to make superphosphate of lime, a mixture of CaSO4  2H2O and Ca(H2PO4 ) 2  H2O.
If phosphate rock is treated with phosphoric acid, Ca(H2PO4)2, or triple phosphate, is produced. The reaction of ammonia and phosphoric acid gives ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4), a very efﬁcient fertilizer because it furnishes both phosphorus and
nitrogen.

Phosphorus Halides
Phosphorus forms all possible halides of the general formulas PX3 and PX5, with the exception of PI5. The PX3 molecule has the expected pyramidal structure [Fig. 20.14(a)].
Under normal conditions of temperature and pressure, PF3 is a colorless gas, PCl3 is a liquid (bp  74°C), PBr3 is a liquid (bp  175°C), and PI3 is an unstable red solid (mp 
61°C). All the PX3 compounds react with water to produce phosphorous acid:
PX3  3H2O1l2 ¡ H3PO3 1aq2  3HX1aq2

In the gaseous and liquid states, the PX5 compounds have molecules with a trigonal
bipyramidal structure [Fig. 20.14(b)]. However, PCl5 and PBr5 form ionic solids: Solid

918

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A
PCl5 contains a mixture of octahedral PCl6  ions and tetrahedral PCl4 ions, and solid
PBr5 appears to consist of PBr4 and Br  ions.
The PX5 compounds react with water to form phosphoric acid:
PX5  4H2O1l2 ¡ H3PO4 1aq2  5HX1aq2

20.4
6A
O
S
Se
Te
Po

The Group 6A Elements

Although in Group 6A (Table 20.4) there is the usual tendency for metallic properties to
increase going down the group, none of the Group 6A elements (valence-electron conﬁguration n2np4) behaves as a typical metal. The most common chemical behavior of a
Group 6A atom is to achieve a noble gas electron conﬁguration by adding two electrons
to become a 2 anion in ionic compounds with metals. In fact, for most metals, the oxides and sulﬁdes constitute the most common minerals.
The Group 6A elements can form covalent bonds with other nonmetals. For example, they combine with hydrogen to form a series of covalent hydrides of the general formula H2X. Those members of the group that have valence d orbitals available (all except
oxygen) commonly form molecules in which they are surrounded by more than eight electrons. Examples are SF4, SF6, TeI4, and SeBr4.
In recent years there has been a growing interest in the chemistry of selenium, an element found throughout the environment in trace amounts. Selenium’s toxicity has long
been known, but recent medical studies have shown an inverse relationship between the
incidence of cancer and the selenium levels in soil. It has been suggested that the resulting greater dietary intake of selenium by people living in areas of relatively high levels
of selenium somehow furnishes protection from cancer. These studies are only preliminary, but selenium is known to be physiologically important (it is involved in the activity
of vitamin E and certain enzymes) and selenium deﬁciency has been shown to be connected to the occurrence of congestive heart failure. Also of importance is the fact that
selenium (along with tellurium) is a semiconductor and therefore ﬁnds some application
in the electronics industry.
Polonium was discovered in 1898 by Marie and Pierre Curie in their search for the
sources of radioactivity in pitchblende. Polonium has 27 isotopes and is highly toxic and
very radioactive. It has been suggested that the isotope 210Po, a natural contaminant of tobacco and an a-particle emitter (see Section 18.1), might be at least partly responsible for
the incidence of cancer in smokers.

TABLE 20.4 Selected Physical Properties, Sources, and Methods of Preparation
for the Group 6A Elements
Element

Electronegativity

Radius
of X2 (pm)

Oxygen

3.5

140

Air

Distillation from
liquid air

Sulfur

2.5

184

Sulfur deposits

Melted with hot
water and pumped
to the surface

Selenium

2.4

198

Impurity in
sulﬁde ores

Reduction of
H2SeO4 with SO2

Tellurium

2.1

221

Nagyagite (mixed
sulﬁde and
telluride)

Reduction of ore
with SO2

Polonium

2.0

230

Pitchblende

Source

Method of
Preparation

20.5 The Chemistry of Oxygen

20.5

919

The Chemistry of Oxygen

It is hard to overstate the importance of oxygen, the most abundant element in and near
the earth’s crust. Oxygen is present in the atmosphere in oxygen gas and ozone; in soil
and rocks in oxide, silicate, and carbonate minerals; in the oceans in water; and in our
bodies in water and in a myriad of molecules. In addition, most of the energy we need to
live and to run our civilization comes from the exothermic reactions of oxygen and carboncontaining molecules.
The most common elemental form of oxygen (O2) constitutes 21% of the volume of
the earth’s atmosphere. Since nitrogen has a lower boiling point than oxygen, nitrogen
can be boiled away from liquid air, leaving oxygen and small amounts of argon, another
component of air. Liquid oxygen is a pale blue liquid that freezes at 219°C and boils at
183°C. The paramagnetism of the O2 molecule can be demonstrated by pouring liquid
oxygen between the poles of a strong magnet, where it “sticks” as it boils away (see
Fig. 9.40). The paramagnetism of the O2 molecule can be accounted for by the molecular orbital model (see Fig. 9.39), which also explains its bond strength.
The other form of elemental oxygen is ozone (O3), a molecule that can be represented
by the resonance structures

The bond angle in the O3 molecule is 117 degrees, in reasonable agreement with the prediction of the VSEPR model (three effective pairs require a trigonal planar arrangement).
That the bond angle is slightly less than 120 degrees can be explained by concluding that
more space is required for the lone pair than for the bonding pairs.
Ozone can be prepared by passing an electric discharge through pure oxygen gas. The
electrical energy disrupts the bonds in some O2 molecules to give oxygen atoms, which
react with other O2 molecules to form O3. Ozone is much less stable than oxygen at 25°C
and 1 atm. For example, K  10 57 for the equilibrium
3O2 1g2 ∆ 2O3 1g2

A pale blue, highly toxic gas, ozone is a much more powerful oxidizing agent than
oxygen. Because of its oxidizing ability, ozone is being considered as a replacement for
chlorine in municipal water puriﬁcation. Chlorine leaves residues of chloro compounds,
such as chloroform (CHCl3), which may cause cancer after long-term exposure. Although
ozone effectively kills the bacteria in water, one problem with ozonolysis is that the water supply is not protected against recontamination, since virtually no ozone remains after the initial treatment. In contrast, for chlorination, signiﬁcant residual chlorine remains
after treatment.
The oxidizing ability of ozone can be highly detrimental, especially when it is formed
in the pollution from automobile exhausts (see Section 5.10).
Ozone exists naturally in the upper atmosphere of the earth. The ozone layer is especially important because it absorbs ultraviolet light and thus acts as a screen to prevent this
radiation, which can cause skin cancer, from penetrating to the earth’s surface. When an
ozone molecule absorbs this energy, it splits into an oxygen molecule and an oxygen atom:
hv

O3 ¡ O2  O
If the oxygen molecule and atom collide, they will not stay together as ozone unless a
“third body,” such as a nitrogen molecule, is present to help absorb the energy released
in the bond formation. The third body absorbs the energy as kinetic energy; its temperature
is increased. Therefore, the energy originally absorbed as ultraviolet radiation is eventually
changed to thermal energy. Thus the ozone prevents the harmful high-energy ultraviolet
light from reaching the earth.

920

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A
Air
Molten
sulfur

Superheated
water

Molten
sulfur

FIGURE 20.15
The Frasch process for recovering sulfur
from underground deposits.

20.6

The scrubbing of sulfur dioxide from
exhaust gases was discussed in
Section 5.10.

FIGURE 20.16
(a) The S8 molecule. (b) Chains of sulfur
atoms in viscous liquid sulfur. The chains
may contain as many as 10,000 atoms.

The Chemistry of Sulfur

Sulfur is found in nature both in large deposits of the free element and in widely distributed ores, such as galena (PbS), cinnabar (HgS), pyrite (FeS2), gypsum (CaSO4  2H2O),
epsomite (MgSO4  7H2O), and glauberite (Na2SO4  CaSO4 ).
About 60% of the sulfur produced in the United States comes from the underground
deposits of elemental sulfur found in Texas and Louisiana. This sulfur is recovered using
the Frasch process developed by Herman Frasch in the 1890s. Superheated water is
pumped into the deposit to melt the sulfur (mp  113°C), which is then forced to the
surface by air pressure (see Fig. 20.15). The remaining 40% of sulfur produced in the
United States is either a by-product of the puriﬁcation of fossil fuels before combustion
to prevent pollution or comes from the sulfur dioxide (SO2) scrubbed from the exhaust
gases when sulfur-containing fuels are burned.
In contrast to oxygen, elemental sulfur exists as S2 molecules only in the gas phase
at high temperatures. Because sulfur atoms form much stronger s bonds than p bonds,
S2 is less stable at 25°C than larger aggregates such as S6 and S8 rings and Sn chains
(Fig. 20.16). The most stable form of sulfur at 25°C and 1 atm is called rhombic sulfur
[see Fig. 20.17(a)], which contains stacked S8 rings. If rhombic sulfur is melted and heated
to 120°C, it forms monoclinic sulfur as it cools slowly [Fig. 20.17(b)]. This form also
contains S8 rings, but the rings are stacked differently than they are in rhombic sulfur.
As sulfur is heated beyond its melting point, a relatively nonviscous liquid containing
S8 rings forms initially. With continued heating, the liquid becomes highly viscous as the
rings ﬁrst break and then link up to form long chains. Further heating lowers the viscosity

(a)
(b)

20.6 The Chemistry of Sulfur

(a)

921

(b)

FIGURE 20.17
(a) Crystals of rhombic sulfur. (b) Crystals of monoclinic sulfur.

because the long chains are broken down as the energetic sulfur atoms break loose. If the
liquid is suddenly cooled, a substance called plastic sulfur, which contains Sn chains and has
rubberlike qualities, is formed. Eventually, this form reverts back to the more stable S8 rings.

Sulfur Oxides

Pouring liquid sulfur into water to produce
plastic sulfur.

From its position below oxygen in the periodic table, we might expect the simplest stable
oxide of sulfur to have the formula SO. However, sulfur monoxide, which can be produced
in small amounts when gaseous sulfur dioxide (SO2) is subjected to an electrical discharge,
is very unstable. The difference in the stabilities of the O2 and SO molecules probably reﬂects the stronger p bonding between oxygen atoms than between sulfur and oxygen atoms.
Sulfur burns in air with a bright blue ﬂame to give sulfur dioxide (SO2), a colorless
gas with a pungent odor, which condenses to a liquid at 10°C and 1 atm. Sulfur dioxide is a very effective antibacterial agent and is often used to preserve stored fruit. Its
structure is given in Fig. 20.18.
Sulfur dioxide reacts with oxygen to produce sulfur trioxide (SO3):
2SO2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2SO3 1g2

FIGURE 20.18
(a) Two of the resonance structures for
SO2. (b) SO2 is a bent molecule with a
119-degree bond angle, as predicted by
the VSEPR model.
FIGURE 20.19
(a) Three of the resonance structures of
SO3. (b) A resonance structure with three
double bonds. (c) SO3 is a planar molecule
with 120-degree bond angles.

However, this reaction is very slow in the absence of a catalyst. One of the mysteries during
early research on air pollution was how the sulfur dioxide produced from the combustion of
sulfur-containing fuels is so rapidly converted to sulfur trioxide. It is now known that dust
and other particles can act as heterogeneous catalysts for this process (see Section 12.8). In
the preparation of sulfur trioxide for the manufacture of sulfuric acid, a platinum or vanadium(V) oxide (V2O5) catalyst is used, and the reaction is carried out at 500°C, even though
this temperature decreases the value of the equilibrium constant for this exothermic reaction.
The bonding in the SO3 molecule is usually described in terms of the resonance structures shown in Fig. 20.19. The molecule is trigonal planar, as predicted by the VSEPR

922

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

(left) A sulfur deposit. (right) Melted sulfur obtained from underground deposits by the Frasch process.

O
S

(a)

model. Sulfur trioxide is a corrosive gas with a choking odor that forms white fumes of
sulfuric acid when it reacts with moisture in the air. Thus sulfur trioxide and nitrogen
dioxide, which reacts with water to form a mixture of nitrous and nitric acids, are the
major culprits in the formation of acid rain.
Sulfur trioxide condenses to a colorless liquid at 44.5°C and freezes at 16.8°C to give
three solid forms, one containing S3O9 rings and the other two containing (SO3)x chains
(Fig. 20.20).

Oxyacids of Sulfur
Sulfur dioxide dissolves in water to form an acidic solution. The reaction is often represented as
SO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2SO3 1aq2
where H2SO3 is called sulfurous acid. However, very little H2SO3 actually exists in the
solution. The major form of sulfur dioxide in water is SO2, and the acid dissociation equilibria are best represented as

(b)

FIGURE 20.20
Different structures for solid SO3. (a) S3O9
rings. (b) (SO3)x chains. In both cases the
sulfur atoms are surrounded by a tetrahedral arrangement of oxygen atoms.

SO2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ H  1aq2  HSO3  1aq2
HSO3  1aq2 ∆ H  1aq2  SO3 2 1aq2

Ka1  1.5  10 2
Ka2  1.0  10 7

This situation is analogous to the behavior of carbon dioxide in water (see Section 14.7).
Although H2SO3 cannot be isolated, salts of SO3 2 (sulﬁtes) and HSO3  (hydrogen sulﬁtes)
are well known.
Sulfur trioxide reacts violently with water to produce the diprotic acid sulfuric acid:
SO3 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ H2SO4 1aq2
Manufactured in greater amounts than any other chemical, sulfuric acid is usually produced by the contact process, which is described at the end of Chapter 3. About 60% of
the sulfuric acid manufactured in the United States is used to produce fertilizers from
phosphate rock (see Section 20.3). The other 40% is used in lead storage batteries and in
petroleum reﬁning, in steel manufacturing, and for various purposes in most of the chemical industries.
Because sulfuric acid has a high afﬁnity for water, it is often used as a dehydrating
agent. Gases that do not react with sulfuric acid, such as oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon
dioxide, are often dried by bubbling them through concentrated solutions of the acid.

20.6 The Chemistry of Sulfur

(a)

(b)

923

(c)

FIGURE 20.21
(a) A beaker of sucrose (table sugar). (b) Concentrated sulfuric acid reacts with the sucrose to produce a column of carbon (c), accompanied by
an intense burnt-sugar odor.

Sulfuric acid is such a powerful dehydrating agent that it will remove hydrogen and oxygen
from a substance in a 2:1 ratio even when the substance contains no molecular water. For
example, concentrated sulfuric acid reacts vigorously with common table sugar (sucrose),
leaving a charred mass of carbon (see Fig. 20.21):
C12H22O11 1s2  11H2SO4 1conc2 ¡ 12C1s2  11H2SO4  H2O1l2
Sucrose

Sulfuric acid is a moderately strong oxidizing agent, especially at high temperatures.
Hot concentrated sulfuric acid oxidizes bromide or iodide ions to elemental bromine or
iodine. For example,
2I  1aq2  3H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ I2 1aq2  SO2 1aq2  2H2O1l2  2HSO4  1aq2
Hot sulfuric acid attacks copper metal:
Cu1s2  2H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ CuSO4 1aq2  2H2O1l2  SO2 1aq2
The cold acid does not react with copper.

Other Compounds of Sulfur
Sulfur reacts with both metals and nonmetals to form a wide variety of compounds in
which it has a 6, 4, 2, 0, or 2 oxidation state (see Table 20.5). The 2 oxidation
state occurs in the metal sulﬁdes and in hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S), a toxic, foul-smelling gas
that acts as a diprotic acid when dissolved in water. Hydrogen sulﬁde is a strong reducing agent in aqueous solution, producing a milky-looking suspension of ﬁnely divided sulfur as one of the products. For example, hydrogen sulﬁde reacts with chlorine in aqueous
solution as follows:
The acidic properties of sulfuric acid
solutions are discussed in Section 14.7.

H2S1g2  Cl2 1aq2 ¡ 2H  1aq2  2Cl  1aq2  S1s2
p

Milky suspension of sulfur

924

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

TABLE 20.5 Common Compounds of Sulfur
with Various Oxidation States
Oxidation
State of Sulfur
6
4
2
0

The preparation of sulfur trioxide provides
an example of the compromise that often
must be made between thermodynamics
and kinetics.

Compounds
SO3, H2SO4, SO4 2, SF6
SO2, HSO3 , SO3 2, SF4
SCl2
S8 and all other forms of
elemental sulfur
H2S, S 2

2

Sulfur also forms the thiosulfate ion (S2O3 2 ), which has the Lewis structure

The preﬁx thio means “sulfur.”

Note that this anion can be viewed as a sulfate ion in which one of the oxygen atoms has
been replaced by sulfur, which is reﬂected in the name thiosulfate. The thiosulfate ion can
be formed by heating sulfur with a sulﬁte salt in aqueous solution:
S1s2  SO3 2 1aq2 ¡ S2O3 2 1aq2
One important use of thiosulfate ion is in photography, where S2O3 2 dissolves solid silver bromide by forming a complex with the Ag ion (see the Chemical Impact in Section 20.7).
Thiosulfate ion is also a good reducing agent and is often used to analyze for iodine:
2S2O3 2 1aq2  I2 1aq2 ¡ S4O6 2 1aq2  2I  1aq2
where S2O6 2 is called the tetrathionate ion.
Sulfur reacts with the halogens to form a variety of compounds, such as S2Cl2, SF4,
SF6, and S2F10. The structures of these molecules are shown in Fig. 20.22.

20.7
7A
F
Cl

The Group 7A Elements

In our coverage of the representative elements, we have progressed from groups of metallic elements (Groups 1A and 2A), through groups in which the lighter members are nonmetals and the heavier members are metals (Groups 3A, 4A, and 5A), to a group of all
nonmetals (Group 6A—although some might prefer to call polonium a metal). The

Br
I
At

FIGURE 20.22
The structures of (a) SF4, (b) SF6, (c) S2F10,
and (d) S2Cl2.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

20.7 The Group 7A Elements

TABLE 20.6

925

Trends in Selected Physical Properties of the Group 7A Elements

Element

Electronegativity

Radius
of X (pm)

e° (V) for
X2  2e S 2X

Bond Energy of
X2(kJ/mol)

Fluorine
Chlorine
Bromine
Iodine
Astatine

4.0
3.0
2.8
2.5
2.2

136
181
185
216
—

2.87
1.36
1.09
0.54
—

154
239
193
149
—

Group 7A elements, the halogens (with the valence-electron conﬁguration ns2np5), are
also all nonmetals whose properties generally vary smoothly going down the group. The
only notable exceptions are the unexpectedly low values for the electron afﬁnity of ﬂuorine and the bond energy of the F2 molecule (see Section 19.1). Table 20.6 summarizes the
trends in some physical properties of the halogens.
Because of their high reactivities, the halogens are not found as the free elements in
nature. Instead, they are found as halide ions 1X  2 in various minerals and in seawater
(see Table 20.7).
Although astatine is a member of Group 7A, its chemistry is of no practical importance because all its known isotopes are radioactive. The longest-lived isotope, 210At, has
a half-life of only 8.3 hours.
The halogens, particularly ﬂuorine, have very high electronegativity values (Table 20.6).
They tend to form polar covalent bonds with other nonmetals and ionic bonds with metals in their lower oxidation states. When a metal ion is in a higher oxidation state, such
as 3 or 4, the metal–halogen bonds are polar covalent ones. For example, TiCl4 and
SnCl4 are both covalent compounds that are liquids under normal conditions.

Hydrogen Halides
The hydrogen halides can be prepared by a reaction of the elements:
H2 1g2  X2 1g2 ¡ 2HX1g2
Chlorine, bromine, and iodine.

TABLE 20.7

This reaction occurs with explosive vigor when ﬂuorine and hydrogen are mixed. On the
other hand, hydrogen and chlorine can coexist with little apparent reaction for relatively

Some Physical Properties, Sources, and Methods of Preparation for the Group 7A Elements
Color and
State

Percentage of
Earth’s Crust

Melting
Point (°C)

Boiling
Point (°C)

Fluorine

Pale yellow
gas

0.07

220

188

Fluorospar (CaF2),
cryolite (Na3AlF6),
ﬂuorapatite
(Ca5(PO4)3F)

Electrolysis of
molten KHF2

Chlorine

Yellow-green
gas

0.14

101

34

Rock salt (NaCl),
halite (NaCl),
sylvite (KCl)

Electrolysis of
aqueous NaCl

Bromine

Red-brown liquid

7.3

59

Seawater, brine wells

Oxidation of Br  by Cl2

113

184

Seaweed, brine wells

Oxidation of I
by electrolysis
or MnO2

Element

Iodine

Violet-black
solid

2.5  10 4
3  10

5

Sources

Method of
Preparation

926

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Photography
n black-and-white photography, light from an object is focused onto a special paper containing an emulsion of solid
silver bromide. Silver salts turn dark when exposed to light
because the radiant energy stimulates the transfer of an electron to the Ag ion, forming an atom of elemental silver.
When photographic paper (ﬁlm) is exposed to light, the areas exposed to the brightest light form the most silver atoms.
The next step is the application of a chemical reducing agent
to the ﬁlm, a process called developing. The real advantage
of silver-based ﬁlms is that the silver atoms already present
from exposure to light catalyze the reduction of millions of
Ag ions in the immediate vicinity in the developing
process. Thus the effect of exposure to light is greatly intensiﬁed in this chemical reduction process. Once the image
has been developed, the unchanged solid silver bromide
must be removed so that the ﬁlm is no longer light-sensitive
and the image is ﬁxed. A solution of sodium thiosulfate
(called hypo) is used in this ﬁxing process:

I

AgBr1s2  2S2O32 1aq2 ¡ Ag1S2O3 2 23 1aq2  Br  1aq2
After the excess silver bromide is dissolved and washed
away, the ﬁxed image (the negative) is ready to produce the
positive print. By shining light through the negative onto a
fresh sheet of ﬁlm and repeating the developing and ﬁxing
processes, a black-and-white photograph can be produced.

Positive and negative images.

long periods in the dark. However, ultraviolet light causes an explosively fast reaction,
and this is the basis of a popular lecture demonstration, the “hydrogen–chlorine cannon.”
Bromine and iodine also react with hydrogen, but more slowly.
The hydrogen halides also can be prepared by treating halide salts with acid. For example, hydrogen ﬂuoride and hydrogen chloride can be prepared as follows:
CaF2 1s2  H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ CaSO4 1s2  2HF1g2
2NaCl1s2  H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ Na2SO4 1s2  2HCl1g2

A candle burning in an atmosphere of Cl2(g).
The exothermic reaction, which involves
breaking COC and COH bonds in the wax
and forming COCl bonds in their places,
produces enough heat to make the gases in
the region incandescent (a ﬂame results).

Sulfuric acid is capable of oxidizing Br  to Br2 and I  to I2 and so cannot be used to
prepare hydrogen bromide and hydrogen iodide. However, phosphoric acid, a nonoxidizing acid, can be used to treat bromides and iodides to form the corresponding hydrogen halides.
Some physical properties of the hydrogen halides are listed in Table 20.8. Note the
very high boiling point for hydrogen ﬂuoride, which results from extensive hydrogen bonding among the very polar HF molecules (Fig. 20.23). Fluoride ion has such a high afﬁnity for protons that in concentrated aqueous solutions of hydrogen ﬂuoride, the ion
[F¬H¬F]  exists, in which an H ion is centered between two F  ions.
When dissolved in water, the hydrogen halides behave as acids, and all except hydrogen ﬂuoride are completely dissociated. Because water is a much stronger base than

20.7 The Group 7A Elements

FIGURE 20.23
The hydrogen bonding among HF molecules in liquid hydrogen ﬂuoride.

TABLE 20.8

Some Physical Properties of the Hydrogen Halides

HX

Melting
Point (°C)

Boiling
Point (°C)

HOX Bond
Energy (kJ/mol)

HF
HCl
HBr
HI

83
114
87
51

20
85
67
35

565
427
363
295

927

Cl , Br , or I  ion, the acid strengths of HCl, HBr, and HI cannot be differentiated in
water. However, in a less basic solvent, such as glacial (pure) acetic acid, the acids show
different strengths of the order
H¬I 7 H¬Br 7 H¬Cl  H¬F
Strongest
acid

Weakest
acid

To see why hydrogen ﬂuoride is the only weak acid in water among the HX molecules, let’s consider the dissociation equilibrium
HX1aq2 ∆ H  1aq2  X  1aq2
where

Ka 

3H  4 3 X  4
3HX4

from a thermodynamic point of view. Recall that acid strength is reﬂected by the magnitude of Ka¬a small Ka value means a weak acid. Also recall that the value of an equilibrium constant depends on the standard free energy change for the reaction as follows:
¢G°  RT ln1K2
As ¢G° becomes more negative, K becomes larger; a decrease in free energy favors a
given reaction. As we saw in Chapter 16, free energy depends on enthalpy, entropy, and
temperature. For a process at constant temperature,
¢G°  ¢H°T¢S°

When H2O molecules cluster around an
ion, an ordering effect occurs, and ¢S°hyd
is negative.

Thus, to explain the various acid strengths of the hydrogen halides, we must focus on the
factors that determine ¢H° and ¢S° for the acid dissociation reaction.
What energy terms are important in determining ¢H° for the dissociation of HX in
water? (Keep in mind that large positive contributions to the value of ¢H° will tend to
make ¢G° more highly positive, Ka smaller, and the acid weaker.) One important factor
is certainly the H¬X bond strength. Note from Table 20.8 that the H¬F bond is much
stronger than the other H¬X bonds. This factor tends to make HF a weaker acid than the
others.
Another important contribution to ¢H° is the enthalpy of hydration (see Section 11.2)
of X  (see Table 20.9). As we would expect, the smallest of the halide ions, F , has the
most negative value—its hydration is the most exothermic. This term favors the dissociation of HF into its ions more so than it does for the other HX molecules.
So far we have two conﬂicting factors: The large HF bond energy tends to make HF
a weaker acid than the other hydrogen halides, but the enthalpy of hydration favors the
dissociation of HF more than that of the others. In comparing data for HF and HCl, the
difference in bond energy (138 kJ/mol) is slightly smaller than the difference in the enthalpies of hydration for the anions (144 kJ/mol). If these were the only important factors, HF should be a stronger acid than HCl because the large enthalpy of hydration of
F  more than makes up for the large HF bond strength.

928

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

TABLE 20.9 The Enthalpies and Entropies of
Hydration for the Halide Ions
HO

2
X  ( g) ¡
X  (aq)

X

H (kJ/mol)

S (J/K  mol)



510
366
334
291

159
96
81
64

F
Cl 
Br 
I

Hydration becomes more exothermic as
the charge density of an ion icreases.
Thus, for ions of a given charge, the
smallest is most strongly hydrated.
Stomach acid is 0.1 M HCl.

This Steuben glass design was etched using
hydroﬂuoric acid.

As it turns out, the deciding factor is entropy. Note from Table 20.9 that the entropy
of hydration for F  is much more negative than for the other halides because of the high
degree of ordering that occurs as the water molecules associate with the small F  ion.
Remember that a negative change in entropy is unfavorable. Thus, although the enthalpy
of hydration favors dissociation of HF, the entropy of hydration strongly opposes it.
When all these factors are taken into account, ¢G° for the dissociation of HF in water is positive; that is, Ka is small. In contrast, ¢G° for dissociation of the other HX molecules in water is negative (Ka is large). This example illustrates the complexity of the
processes that occur in aqueous solutions and the importance of entropy effects in that
medium.
In practical terms, hydrochloric acid is the most important of the hydrohalic acids,
the aqueous solutions of the hydrogen halides. About 3 million tons of hydrochloric acid
is produced annually for use in cleaning steel before galvanizing and in the manufacture
of many other chemicals.
Hydroﬂuoric acid is used to etch glass by reacting with the silica in glass to form the
volatile gas SiF4:
SiO2 1s2  4HF1aq2 ¡ SiF4 1g2  2H2O1l2

Oxyacids and Oxyanions
All the halogens except ﬂuorine combine with various numbers of oxygen atoms to form
a series of oxyacids, as shown in Table 20.10. The strengths of these acids vary in direct
proportion to the number of oxygen atoms attached to the halogen, as we discussed in
Section 14.9.
The only member of the chlorine series that has been obtained in the pure state is
perchloric acid (HOClO3), a strong acid and powerful oxidizing agent. Because perchloric
acid reacts explosively with many organic materials, it must be handled with great caution.
The other oxyacids of chlorine are known only in solution, although salts containing their
anions are well known (Fig. 20.24).

TABLE 20.10

The Known Oxyacids of the Halogens*

Oxidation State
of Halogen

Fluorine

Chlorine

Bromine

Iodine*

General Name
of Acids

General Name
of Salts

1
3
5
7

HOF
**
**
**

HOCl
HOClO
HOClO2
HOClO3

HOBr
**
HOBrO2
HOBrO3

HOI
**
HOIO2
HOIO3

Hypohalous acid
Halous acid
Halic acid
Perhalic acid

Hypohalites, MOX
Halites, MXO2
Halates, MXO3
Perhalates, MXO4

*Iodine also forms H4I2O9 (mesodiperiodic acid) and H5IO6 (paraperiodic acid).

**Compound is unknown.

929

20.7 The Group 7A Elements

Cl

O

O

Cl
O

Cl
O

O

Cl

O
O

O

Cl

O

O
O

FIGURE 20.24
The structures of the oxychloro anions.

Hypochlorite ion,
OCl–

Chlorite ion,
ClO2–

Chlorate ion,
ClO3–

Perchlorate ion,
ClO4–

Hypochlorous acid (HOCl) is formed when chlorine gas is dissolved in cold water:
Cl2 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ HOCl1aq2  H  1aq2  Cl  1aq2

The name for OF2 is oxygen diﬂuoride
rather than diﬂuorine oxide because
ﬂuorine has a higher electronegativity
than oxygen and thus is named as if it
were an anion.

Note that in this reaction chlorine is both oxidized (from 0 in Cl2 to 1 in HOCl) and
reduced (from 0 in Cl2 to 1 in Cl ). Such a reaction, where a given element is both oxidized and reduced, is called a disproportionation reaction. Hypochlorous acid and its
salts are strong oxidizing agents, and solutions of them are widely used as household
bleaches and disinfectants.
Chlorate salts, such as KClO3, are also strong oxidizing agents and are used as weed
killers and as oxidizers in ﬁreworks (see Chapter 7) and explosives.
Fluorine forms only one oxyacid, hypoﬂuorous acid (HOF), but at least two oxides.
When ﬂuorine gas is bubbled into a dilute solution of sodium hydroxide, the compound
oxygen diﬂuoride (OF2) is formed:
4F2 1g2  3H2O1l2 ¡ 6HF1aq2  OF2 1g2  O2 1g2

Oxygen diﬂuoride is a pale yellow gas 1bp  145°C2, which is a strong oxidizing agent.
The oxide dioxygen diﬂuoride (O2F2) is an orange solid that can be prepared by passing
an electric discharge through an equimolar mixture of ﬂuorine and oxygen gases:
F2 1g2  O2 1g2

Sample Exercise 20.5

Electric
discharge

¡ O2F2 1s2

Bonding Description of OF2
Give the Lewis structure, molecular structure, and hybridization of the oxygen atom for
OF2.
Solution
The OF2 molecule has 20 valence electrons and the Lewis structure is

The four effective pairs around the oxygen are arranged tetrahedrally. Therefore, the oxygen atom is sp3 hybridized. The molecule is bent (V-shaped), and the bond angle is predicted to be smaller than 109.5 degrees because of the lone-pair repulsions.
See Exercise 20.37.

930

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

TABLE 20.11

Some Compounds of the Halogens with Nonmetals

Compounds with
Group 3A Nonmetals

Compounds with
Group 4A Nonmetals

Compounds with
Group 5A Nonmetals

Compounds with
Group 6A Nonmetals

Compounds with
Group 7A Nonmetals

BX3 (X  F, Cl, Br, I)
BF4 

CX4 (X  F, Cl, Br, I)

NX3 (X  F, Cl, Br, I)
N2F4

OF2
O2F2
OCl2
OBr2

ICl
IBr
BrF
BrCl
ClF

SiF4
SiF6 2
SiCl4

PX3 (X  F, Cl, Br, I)
PF5
PCl5
PBr5

GeF4
GeF6 2
GeCl4

SF2
SCl2
S2F2
S2Cl2
SF4
SCl4
SF6

AsF3
AsF5
SbF3
SbF5

SeF4
SeF6
SeCl2
SeCl4
SeBr4

ClF3
BrF3
ICl3
IF3
ClF5
BrF5
IF5
IF7

TeF4
TeF6
TeCl4
TeBr4
TeI4

Other Halogen Compounds
The halogens react readily with most nonmetals to form a variety of compounds, some of
which are shown in Table 20.11.
Halogens react with each other to form interhalogen compounds with the general
formula ABn, where n is typically 1, 3, 5, or 7 and A is the larger of the two halogens. The
structures of these compounds (see Fig. 20.25) are predicted accurately by the VSEPR
model. The interhalogens are volatile, highly reactive compounds that act as strong oxidizing
agents. They react readily with water, forming the halide ion of the more electronegative
halogen and the hypohalous acid of the less electronegative halogen. For example,
ICl1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ H  1aq2  Cl  1aq2  HOI1aq2
F

F
F
F

Cl

F

F
I

F

F

F

FIGURE 20.25
The idealized structures of the interhalogens ClF3 and lF5. In reality, the lone pairs
cause the bond angles to be slightly less
than 90 degrees.

Unshared
electron pairs
(a) ClF3 is “T-shaped”

Unshared
electron pair
(b) IF5 is square pyramidal

20.8 The Group 8A Elements

931

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Automatic Sunglasses
unglasses can be troublesome. It seems they are always
getting lost or sat on. One solution to this problem for
people who wear glasses is photochromic glass—glass that
darkens in response to intense light. Recall that glass is a
complex, noncrystalline material that is composed of polymeric silicates (see Chapter 10). Of course, glass transmits
visible light—its transparency is its most useful property.
Glass can be made photochromic by adding tiny silver
chloride crystals that get trapped in the glass matrix as the
glass solidiﬁes. Silver chloride has the unusual property of
darkening when struck by light—the property that makes the
silver halide salts so useful for photographic ﬁlms. This
darkening occurs because light causes an electron transfer
from Cl  to Ag in the silver chloride crystal, forming a silver atom and a chlorine atom. The silver atoms formed in
this way tend to migrate to the surface of the silver chloride
crystal, where they aggregate to form a tiny crystal of silver metal, which is opaque to light.
In photography the image deﬁned by the grains of silver is ﬁxed by chemical treatment so that it remains permanent. However, in photochromic glass this process must
be reversible—the glass must become fully transparent again
when the person goes back indoors. The secret to the reversibility of photochromic glass is the presence of Cu ions.
The added Cu ions serve two important functions. First,
they reduce the Cl atoms formed in the light-induced reaction. This prevents them from escaping from the crystal:

S

hv

Ag   Cl  ¡ Ag  Cl
Cl  Cu  ¡ Cu 2  Cl 

20.8
8A
He
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe
Rn

Glasses with photosensitive lenses. The right lens has
been exposed to light and the left one has not.

Second, when the exposure to intense light ends (the person
goes indoors), the Cu2 ions migrate to the surface of the silver chloride crystal, where they accept electrons from silver
atoms as the tiny crystal of silver atoms disintegrates:
Cu 2  Ag ¡ Cu   Ag 
The Ag ions are re-formed in this way, then return to their
places in the silver chloride crystal, making the glass transparent once again.
Typical photochromic glass decreases to about 20%
transmittance (transmits 20% of the light that strikes it) in
strong sunlight, and then over a period of a few minutes returns to about 80% transmittance indoors (normal glass has
92% transmittance).

The Group 8A Elements

The Group 8A elements, the noble gases, are characterized by ﬁlled s and p valence orbitals (electron conﬁguration of 2s2 for helium and ns2np6 for the others). Because of this,
these elements are very unreactive. In fact, no noble gas compounds were known 50 years
ago. Selected properties of the Group 8A elements are summarized in Table 20.12.
Helium was identiﬁed by its characteristic emission spectrum as a component of the
sun before it was found on earth. The major sources of helium on earth are natural gas
deposits, where helium was formed from a-particle decay of radioactive elements. The a
particle is a helium nucleus that can easily pick up electrons from the environment to form
a helium atom. Although helium forms no compounds, it is an important substance that
is used as a coolant, as a pressurizing gas for rocket fuels, as a diluent in the gases used
for deep-sea diving and spaceship atmospheres, and as the gas in lighter-than-air airships
(blimps).

932

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

TABLE 20.12

Selected Properties of Group 8A Elements

Element

Melting
Point (°C)

Boiling
Point (°C)

Atmospheric
Abundance
(% by Volume)

Helium
Neon
Argon
Krypton
Xenon

270
249
189
157
112

269
246
186
153
107

5  10 4
1  10 3
9  10 1
1  10 4
9  10 6

Examples of
Compounds
None
None
None
KrF2
XeF4, XeO3, XeF6

Neon, a noble gas, is used in luminescent
lighting (neon signs).

Like helium, neon and argon form no compounds but are used extensively. For example, neon is employed in luminescent lighting (neon signs), and argon is used to provide the noncorrosive atmosphere in incandescent light bulbs, which prolongs the life of
the tungsten ﬁlament.
Of the Group 8A elements, only krypton and xenon have been observed to form chemical compounds. The ﬁrst of these was prepared in 1962 by Neil Bartlett, an English
chemist who used Xe(g) and PtF6(g) to make the ionic compound with the empirical formula XePtF6.
Less than a year after Bartlett’s report of XePtF6, a group at Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago prepared xenon tetraﬂuoride by reaction of xenon and ﬂuorine gases
in a nickel reaction vessel at 400°C and 6 atm:
Xe1g2  2F2 1g2 ¡ XeF4 1s2
Xenon tetraﬂuoride forms stable colorless crystals. Two other xenon ﬂuorides, XeF2 and
XeF6, were synthesized by the group at Argonne, and a highly explosive xenon oxide
(XeO3) also was found. The xenon ﬂuorides react with water to form hydrogen ﬂuoride
and oxycompounds. For example,
XeF6 1s2  3H2O1l2 ¡ XeO3 1aq2  6HF1aq2
XeF6 1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ XeOF4 1aq2  2HF1g2
In the past 40 years, other xenon compounds have been prepared—for example, XeO4
(explosive), XeO2F4, XeO2F2, and XeO3F2. These compounds contain discrete molecules
with covalent bonds between the xenon and the other atoms. The structures of some of
these xenon compounds are summarized in Fig. 20.26. A few compounds of krypton, such
as KrF2 and KrF4, also have been observed. There is evidence that radon also reacts with
ﬂuorine, but the radioactivity of radon makes its chemistry very difﬁcult to study.
Sample Exercise 20.6

The Structure of XeF6
Use the VSEPR model to predict whether XeF6 has an octahedral structure.
Solution
The XeF6 molecule contains 50 [8  6(7)] valence electrons and the Lewis structure is

The xenon atom has seven pairs of electrons around it (one lone pair and six bonding
pairs), one more pair than can be accommodated in an octahedral arrangement. Thus XeF6

For Review

F

F

XeF2
Linear

XeO2F2
Distorted tetrahedron

933

F

XeO3
Pyramidal

XeO4
Tetrahedral

F

FIGURE 20.26
The structures of several known xenon
compounds.

XeF4
Square planar

XeO3F2
Trigonal bipyramid

XeO2F4
Octahedral

will not have an octahedral structure, but should be distorted from this geometry by the
extra electron pair. There is experimental evidence that the structure of XeF6 is not
octahedral.
See Exercises 20.43 and 20.44.

Key Terms
Section 20.2
Haber process
nitrogen ﬁxation
nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria
denitriﬁcation
nitrogen cycle
ammonia
hydrazine
nitric acid
Ostwald process

Section 20.3
phosphoric (orthophosphoric) acid
condensation reactions
phosphorous acid
superphosphate of lime

Section 20.5
ozone
ozonolysis

Section 20.6
Frasch process
sulfuric acid
thiosulfate ion

For Review
Group 5A
䊉 Elements show a wide variety of chemical properties
• Nitrogen and phosphorus are nonmetals
• Antimony and bismuth tend to be metallic, although no ionic compounds containing Sb5 and Bi5 are known; the compounds containing Sb(V) and Bi(V)
are molecular rather than ionic
• All group members except N form molecules with ﬁve covalent bonds
• The ability to form p bonds decreases dramatically after N
䊉 Chemistry of nitrogen
• Most nitrogen-containing compounds decompose exothermically, forming the
very stable N2 molecule, which explains the power of nitrogen-based explosives
• The nitrogen cycle, which consists of a series of steps, shows how nitrogen is
cycled in the natural environment
• Nitrogen ﬁxation changes the N2 in air into compounds useful to plants
• The Haber process is a synthetic method of nitrogen ﬁxation
• In the natural world, nitrogen ﬁxation occurs through nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria
in the root nodules of certain plants and through lightning in the atmosphere
• Ammonia is the most important hydride of nitrogen
• Contains pyramidal NH3 molecules
• Widely used as a fertilizer
• Hydrazine (N2H4) is a powerful reducing agent

934

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

Section 20.7
halogens
hydrochloric acid
hydrohalic acids
disproportionation reaction
interhalogen compounds

Section 20.8
noble gases

䊉

• Nitrogen forms a series of oxides including N2O, NO, NO2, and N2O5
• Nitric acid (HNO3) is a very important strong acid manufactured by the Ostwald
process
Chemistry of phosphorus
• Exists in three elemental forms: white (contains P4 molecules), red, and black
• Phosphine (PH3) has bond angles close to 90 degrees
• Phosphorus forms oxides including P4O6 and P4O10 (which dissolves in water to
form phosphoric acid, H3PO4)

Group 6A
䊉 Metallic character increases going down the group but no element behaves as a
typical metal
2
䊉 The lighter members tend to gain two electrons to form X
ions in compounds
with metals
䊉 Chemistry of oxygen
• Elemental forms are O2 and O3
• Oxygen forms a wide variety of oxides
• O2 and especially O3 are powerful oxidizing agents
䊉 Chemistry of sulfur
• The elemental forms are called rhombic and monoclinic sulfur, both of which
contain S8 molecules
• The most important oxides are SO2 (which forms H2SO3 in water) and SO3
(which forms H2SO4 in water)
• Sulfur forms a wide variety of compounds in which it shows the oxidation states
6, 4, 2, 0, and 2
Group 7A (halogens)
䊉 All nonmetals
䊉 Form hydrides of the type HX that behave as strong acids in water except for HF,
which is a weak acid
䊉 The oxyacids of the halogens become stronger as more oxygen atoms are present
䊉 The interhalogens contain two or more different halogens
Group 8A (noble gases)
䊉 All elements are monatomic gases and are generally very unreactive
䊉 The heavier elements form compounds with electronegative elements such as
ﬂuorine and oxygen

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the valence electron conﬁguration for Group 5A elements? Metallic
character increases when going down a group. Give some examples illustrating
how Bi and Sb have metallic characteristics not associated with N, P, and As.
The Group 5A elements can form molecules or ions that involve three, ﬁve, or
six covalent bonds; NH3, AsCl5, and PF6 are examples. Draw the Lewis structure for each of these substances and predict the molecular structure and hybridization for each. Why doesn’t NF5 or NCl6 form?
2. Table 20.2 lists some common nitrogen compounds having oxidation states ranging from 3 to 5. Rationalize this spread in oxidation states. For each substance listed in Table 20.2, list some of its special properties.
3. Ammonia forms hydrogen-bonding intermolecular forces resulting in an unusually high boiling point for a substance with the small size of NH3. Can hydrazine, N2H4, also form hydrogen-bonding interactions?
The synthesis of ammonia gas from nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas is a
classic case in which a knowledge of kinetics and equilibrium was exploited to

For Review

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

935

make a desired chemical reaction economically feasible. Explain how each of
the following conditions helps to maximize the yield of ammonia:
a. running the reaction at an elevated temperature
b. removing the ammonia from the reaction mixture as it forms
c. using a catalyst
d. running the reaction at high pressure
In many natural waters, nitrogen and phosphorus are the least abundant
nutrients available for plant life. Some waters that become polluted from agricultural runoff or municipal sewage become infested with algae. The algae consume most of the dissolved oxygen in the water, and ﬁsh life dies off as a result.
Describe how these events are chemically related.
White phosphorus is much more reactive than black or red phosphorus. Explain.
How is phosphine’s (PH3) structure different from that of ammonia? Phosphoric
acid (H3PO4) is a triprotic acid, phosphorous acid (H3PO3) is a diprotic acid, and
hypophosphorous acid (H3PO2) is a monoprotic acid. Explain this phenomenon.
What is the valence electron conﬁguration of Group 6A elements? What are
some property differences between oxygen and polonium? What are the Lewis
structures for the two allotropic forms of oxygen? How can the paramagnetism
of O2 be explained using the molecular orbital model? What is the molecular
structure and the bond angle in ozone? Ozone is desirable in the upper atmosphere and undesirable in the lower atmosphere. A dictionary states that ozone
has the scent of a fresh spring day. How can these seemingly conﬂicting statements be reconciled in terms of the chemical properties of ozone?
The most stable form of solid sulfur is the rhombic form; however, a solid form
called monoclinic sulfur can also form. What is the difference between rhombic
and monoclinic sulfur? Explain why O2 is much more stable than S2 or SO. When
SO2(s) or SO3(g) reacts with water, an acidic solution forms. Explain. What are
the molecular structures and bond angles in SO2 and SO3? Explain the bonding in
SO2 and SO3. H2SO4 is a powerful dehydrating agent: What does this mean?
What is the valence electron conﬁguration of the halogens? Why do the boiling
points and melting points of the halogens increase steadily from F2 to I2? Give
two reasons why F2 is the most reactive of the halogens. Explain why HF is a
weak acid, whereas HCl, HBr, and HI are all strong acids.
Explain why the boiling point of HF is much higher than the boiling points
of HCl, HBr, and HI. In nature, the halogens are generally found as halide ions
in various minerals and seawater. What is a halide ion, and why are halide salts
so stable? The oxidation states of the halogens vary from 1 to 7. Identify
compounds of chlorine that have 1, 1, 3, 5, and 7 oxidation states.
How does the oxyacid strength of the halogens vary as the number of oxygens
in the formula increases?
Table 20.11 lists many compounds or ions that halogens form with other nonmetals. For each compound or ion, give the molecular structure, including bond
angles, and give the hybridization of the central atom in each species (ignore
IF7). Why does ICl3 form but not FCl3?
What special property of the noble gases makes them unreactive? The boiling
points and melting points of the noble gases increase steadily from He to Xe.
Explain. Although He is the second most abundant element in the universe, it is
very rare on earth. Why? The noble gases were among the last elements discovered; their existence was not predicted by Mendeleev when he published his ﬁrst
periodic table. Explain. In chemistry textbooks written before 1962, the noble
gases were referred to as the inert gases. Why do we no longer use this term?
For the structures of the xenon compounds in Figure 20.26, give the bond angles
exhibited and the hybridization of the central atom in each compound.

936

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
1. Elemental nitrogen exists as N2, whereas in the gas phase the elements phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony consist of P4, As4, and
Sb4 molecules, respectively. Give a possible reason for this difference between N2 and the other group 5A elements.
2. What is nitrogen ﬁxation? Give some examples of nitrogen ﬁxation.
3. In large doses, selenium is toxic. However, in moderate intake,
selenium is a physiologically important element. How is selenium
physiologically important?
4. Ozone is a possible replacement for chlorine in municipal water
puriﬁcation. Unlike chlorine, virtually no ozone remains after
treatment. This has good and bad consequences. Explain.
5. Sulfur forms a wide variety of compounds in which it has 6,
4, 2, 0, and 2 oxidation states. Give examples of sulfur compounds having each of these oxidation states.
6. When a halogen is a central atom in a compound, the compound
typically is sp3, dsp3, or d 2sp3 hybridized. Using bromine as your
central atom, give example compounds for each type of hybridization. What is the molecular structure for each of your examples?
7. Explain the following observations regarding reactions of halogens.
a. In the hydrogen-chlorine cannon lecture demonstration, a lit
magnesium strip is held to a mixture of H2 and Cl2, resulting
in a reaction that sends the stopper to the cannon ﬂying across
the lecture room.
b. When a brown bromine solution is added dropwise to an organic compound called an alkene, the brown color disappears,
resulting in a colorless reaction mixture.
c. When aluminum is reacted with iodine, the reaction container
emits sparks and a deep purple colored smoke.
8. There is evidence that radon reacts with ﬂuorine to form compounds similar to those formed by xenon and ﬂuorine. Predict the
formulas of these RaFx compounds. Why is the chemistry of radon
difﬁcult to study?

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

Group 5A Elements
9. The oxyanion of nitrogen in which it has the highest oxidation
state is the nitrate ion (NO3 ). The corresponding oxyanion of
phosphorus is PO4 3. The NO4 3 ion is known but not very stable. The PO3 ion is not known. Account for these differences in
terms of the bonding in the four anions.
10. In each of the following pairs of substances, one is stable and
known, and the other is unstable. For each pair, choose the stable
substance, and explain why the other is unstable.
b. AsF5 or AsI5
c. NF3 or NBr3
a. NF5 or PF5

11. Several important compounds contain only nitrogen and oxygen.
Place the following compounds in order of increasing mass percent of nitrogen.
a. NO, a gas formed by the reaction of N2 with O2 in internal
combustion engines
b. NO2, a brown gas mainly responsible for the brownish color
of photochemical smog
c. N2O4, a colorless liquid used as fuel in space shuttles
d. N2O, a colorless gas sometimes used as an anesthetic by dentists (known as laughing gas)
12. Nitric acid is produced commercially by the Ostwald process, represented by the following equations:
4NH3 1g2  5O2 1g2 ¡ 4NO1g2  6H2O1g2
2NO1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO2 1g2

3NO2 1g2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2HNO3 1aq2  NO1g2
What mass of NH3 must be used to produce 1.0  10 6 kg HNO3
by the Ostwald process? Assume 100% yield in each reaction and
assume that the NO produced in the third step is not recycled.
13. Complete and balance each of the following reactions.
a. the decomposition of solid ammonium nitrate
b. the decomposition of gaseous dinitrogen pentoxide
c. the reaction between solid potassium phosphide and water
d. the reaction between liquid phosphorus tribromide and water
e. the reaction between aqueous ammonia and aqueous sodium
hypochlorite
14. Arsenic reacts with oxygen to form oxides that react with water
in a manner analogous to that of the phosphorus oxides. Write
balanced chemical equations describing the reaction of arsenic
with oxygen and the reaction of the resulting oxide with water.
15. Phosphorus occurs naturally in the form of ﬂuorapatite, CaF2 
3Ca3(PO4)2, where the dot indicates 1 part CaF2 to 3 parts
Ca3(PO4)2. This mineral is reacted with an aqueous solution of
sulfuric acid in the preparation of a fertilizer. The products are
phosphoric acid, hydrogen ﬂuoride, and gypsum, CaSO4 
2H2O. Write and balance the chemical equation describing this
process.
16. Lewis structures can be used to understand why some molecules
react in certain ways. Write the Lewis structure for the reactants
and products in the reactions described below.
a. Nitrogen dioxide dimerizes to produce dinitrogen tetroxide.
b. Boron trihydride accepts a pair of electrons from ammonia,
forming BH3NH3.
Give a possible explanation for why these two reactions occur.
17. Air bags are activated when a severe impact causes a steel ball to
compress a spring and electrically ignite a detonator cap. This
causes sodium azide (NaN3) to decompose explosively according
to the following reaction:
2NaN3 1s2 ¡ 2Na1s2  3N2 1g2
How many moles of NaN3(s) must be reacted to inﬂate an air bag
to 70.0 L at STP?

Exercises
18. Urea (H2NCONH2) is used extensively as a nitrogen source in fertilizers. It is produced commercially from the reaction of ammonia and carbon dioxide:
2NH3 1g2  CO2 1g2 ¡ H2NCONH2 1s2  H2O1g2
Ammonia gas at 223°C and 90. atm ﬂows into a reactor at a rate
of 500. L/min. Carbon dioxide at 223°C and 45 atm ﬂows into
the reactor at a rate of 600. L/min. What mass of urea is produced
per minute by this reaction assuming a 100% yield?
19. Hydrazine (N2H4) is used as a fuel in liquid-fueled rockets. When
hydrazine reacts with oxygen gas, nitrogen gas and water vapor
are produced. Write a balanced equation and use bond energies
from Table 8.4 to estimate ¢H for this reaction.
20. The space shuttle orbiter utilizes the oxidation of methylhydrazine
by dinitrogen tetroxide for propulsion:
4N2H3CH3 1l2  5N2O4 1l2 ¡ 12H2O1g2  9N2 1g2  4CO2 1g2
Calculate ¢H° for this reaction using data in Appendix 4. Compare your answer to the ¢H value determined in Sample Exercise
20.2. Explain any discrepancies.
21. Many oxides of nitrogen have positive values for the standard free
energy of formation. Using NO as an example, explain why this
is the case.
22. Using data from Appendix 4 calculate ¢H°, ¢S°, and ¢G° for
the reaction
N2 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2NO1g2
Why does NO form in an automobile engine but then does not
readily decompose back to N2 and O2 in the atmosphere?
23. Compare the Lewis structures with the molecular orbital view of
the bonding in NO, NO, and NO . Account for any discrepancies between the two models.
24. The energy to break a particular bond is not always constant. It
takes about 200 kJ/mol less energy to break the N¬Cl bond in
NOCl as compared with NCl3:
NOCl ¡ NO  Cl
NCl3 ¡ NCl2  Cl

¢H°  158 kJ/mol
¢H°  375 kJ/mol

Why is there such a great discrepancy in the apparent N¬Cl bond
energies? Hint: Consider what happens to the nitrogen–oxygen
bond in the ﬁrst reaction.
25. Predict the relative acid strengths of the following compounds.
a. H3PO4 and H3PO3
b. H3PO4, H2PO4, and HPO4 2
26. Trisodium phosphate (TSP) is an effective grease remover. Like
many cleaners, TSP acts as a base in water. Write a balanced equation to account for this behavior.
27. Isohypophosphonic acid (H4P2O6) and diphosphonic acid (H4P2O5)
are tri- and diprotic acids, respectively. Draw Lewis structures for
these acids that are consistent with these facts.
28. One of the most strongly acidic solutions known is a mixture of
antimony pentaﬂuoride (SbF5) and ﬂuorosulfonic acid (HSO3F).
The dominant equilibria are
SbF5  HSO3F ∆ F5SbOSO2FH
F5SbOSO2FH  HSO3F ∆ H2SO3F   F5SbOSO2F 

937

a. Draw Lewis structures for all the species shown in the preceding reactions. Predict the hybridization of the central Sb
and S atoms in each structure.
b. This superacid solution is capable of protonating (adding H
to) virtually every known organic compound. What is the active protonating agent in the superacid solution?

Group 6A Elements
29. Use bond energies to estimate the maximum wavelength of light
that will cause the reaction
hv

O3 ¡ O2  O
30. The xerographic (dry writing) process was invented in 1938 by C.
Carlson. In xerography, an image is produced on a photoconductor by exposing it to light. Selenium is commonly used, since its
conductivity increases three orders of magnitude upon exposure to
light in the range from 400 to 500 nm. What color light should be
used to cause selenium to become conductive? (See Figure 7.2.)
31. Complete and balance each of the following reactions.
a. the reaction between sulfur dioxide gas and oxygen gas
b. the reaction between sulfur trioxide gas and water
c. the reaction between aqueous sodium thiosulfate and aqueous
iodine
d. the reaction between copper metal and aqueous hot sulfuric acid
32. Write a balanced equation describing the reduction of H2SeO4 by
SO2 to produce selenium.
33. For each of the following, write the Lewis structure(s), predict the
molecular structure (including bond angles), and give the expected
hybridization of the central atom.
a. SO3 2
c. SCl2
e. TeF6
b. O3
d. SeBr4
34. Disulfur dinitride (S2N2) exists as a ring of alternating sulfur and
nitrogen atoms. S2N2 will polymerize to polythiazyl, which acts
as a metallic conductor of electricity along the polymer chain.
Write a Lewis structure for S2N2.
35. Hydrogen peroxide is used as a cleaning agent in the treatment of
cuts and abrasions for several reasons. It is an oxidizing agent that
can directly kill many microorganisms; it decomposes upon contact with blood, releasing elemental oxygen gas (which inhibits
the growth of anaerobic microorganisms); and it foams upon contact with blood, which provides a cleansing action. In the laboratory, small quantities of hydrogen peroxide can be prepared by
the action of an acid on an alkaline earth metal peroxide, such as
barium peroxide:
BaO2 1s2  2HCl1aq2 ¡ H2O2 1aq2  BaCl2 1aq2
What mass of hydrogen peroxide should result when 1.50 g of
barium peroxide is treated with 25.0 mL of hydrochloric acid solution containing 0.0272 g of HCl per mL? What mass of which
reagent is left unreacted?
36. During the developing process of black-and-white ﬁlm, silver bromide is removed from photographic ﬁlm by the ﬁxer. The major
component of the ﬁxer is sodium thiosulfate. The net ionic equation for the reaction is
AgBr1s2  2S2O3 2 1aq2 ¡ Ag1S2O3 2 2 3 1aq2  Br  1aq2

938

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

What mass of AgBr can be dissolved by 1.00 L of 0.200 M
Na2S2O3? (Assume the reaction goes to completion.)

45. Xenon diﬂuoride has proven to be a versatile ﬂuorinating agent.
For example, in the reaction
C6H6 1l2  XeF2 1g2 ¡ C6H5F1l2  Xe1g2  HF1g2

Group 7A Elements
37. Write the Lewis structure for O2F2. Predict the bond angles and
hybridization of the two central oxygen atoms. Assign oxidation
states and formal charges to the atoms in O2F2. The compound
O2F2 is a vigorous and potent oxidizing and ﬂuorinating agent.
Are oxidation states or formal charges more useful in accounting
for these properties of O2F2?
38. For each of the following, write the Lewis structure(s), predict the
molecular structure (including bond angles), and give the expected
hybridization of the central atom.
a. Freon-12 (CCl2F2)
c. iodine trichloride
b. perchloric acid
d. bromine pentaﬂuoride

the by-products Xe and HF are easily removed, leaving pure
C6H5F. Xenon diﬂuoride is stored in an inert atmosphere free from
oxygen and water. Why is this necessary?
46. Using the data in Table 20.12, calculate the mass of argon at 25°C
and 1.0 atm in a room 10.0 m  10.0 m  10.0 m. How many Ar
atoms are in this room? How many Ar atoms do you inhale in one
breath (approximately 2 L) of air at 25°C and 1.0 atm? Argon gas
is inert, so it poses no serious health risks. However, if signiﬁcant
amounts of radon were inhaled into the lungs, lung cancer is a
possible result. Explain the health-risk differences between argon
gas and radon gas.

39. Complete and balance each of the following reactions.
a. BaCl2 1s2  H2SO4 1aq2 ¡
b. BrF1s2  H2O1l2 ¡
c. SiO2 1s2  HF1aq2 ¡
40. Hypoﬂuorous acid is the most recently prepared of the halogen
oxyacids. Weighable amounts were ﬁrst obtained in 1971 by M. H.
Studies and E. N. Appelman using the ﬂuorination of ice. Hypoﬂuorous acid is exceedingly unstable, decomposing spontaneously
(with a half-life of 30 min) to HF and O2 in a Teﬂon container at
room temperature. It reacts rapidly with water to produce HF,
H2O2, and O2. In dilute acid, H2O2 is the major product; in dilute
base, O2 is the major product.
a. Write balanced equations for the reactions described above.
b. Assign oxidation states to the elements in hypoﬂuorous acid.
Does this suggest why hypoﬂuorous acid is so unstable?

47. Which do you think would be the greater health hazard, the release of a radioactive nuclide of Sr or a radioactive nuclide of Xe
into the environment? Assume the amount of radioactivity is the
same in each case. Explain your answer on the basis of the chemical properties of Sr and Xe. Why are the chemical properties of
a radioactive substance important in assessing its potential health
hazards?
48. The most signiﬁcant source of natural radiation is radon-222.
222
Rn, a decay product of 238U, is continuously generated in the
earth’s crust, allowing gaseous Rn to seep into the basements of
buildings. Because 222Rn is an a-particle producer with a relatively short half-life of 3.82 days, it can cause biological damage
when inhaled.
a. How many a particles and b particles are produced when 238U
decays to 222Rn? What nucleus is produced when 222Rn decays?
b. Radon is a noble gas so one would expect it to pass through
the body quickly. Why is there a concern over inhaling 222Rn?

41. Hydrazine is somewhat toxic. Use the following half-reactions to
explain why household bleach (highly alkaline solution of sodium
hypochlorite) should not be mixed with household ammonia or
glass cleansers that contain ammonia.
ClO   H2O  2e  ¡ 2OH   Cl 
N2H4  2H2O  2e



¡ 2NH3  2OH

e°  0.90 V


e°  0.10 V

42. What is a disproportionation reaction? Use the following reduction potentials
ClO3  3H   2e  ¡ HClO2  H2O

e °  1.21 V

HClO2  2H   2e  ¡ HClO  H2O

e °  1.65 V

to predict whether HClO2 will disproportionate.

Group 8A Elements
43. The xenon halides and oxides are isoelectronic with many other
compounds and ions containing halogens. Give a molecule or ion
in which iodine is the central atom that is isoelectronic with each
of the following.
a. xenon tetroxide
d. xenon tetraﬂuoride
b. xenon trioxide
e. xenon hexaﬂuoride
c. xenon diﬂuoride
44. For each of the following, write the Lewis structure(s), predict the
molecular structure (including bond angles), and give the expected
hybridization of the central atom.
b. KrF4
c. XeO2F2
d. XeO2F4
a. KrF2

Additional Exercises
49. The compound NF3 is quite stable, but NCl3 is very unstable (NCl3
was ﬁrst synthesized in 1811 by P. L. Dulong, who lost three ﬁngers and an eye studying its properties). The compounds NBr3 and
NI3 are rare, although the explosive compound NI3  NH3 is
known. Account for the instability of these halides of nitrogen.
50. The N2O molecule is linear and polar.
a. On the basis of this experimental evidence, which arrangement,
NNO or NON, is correct? Explain your answer.
b. On the basis of your answer in part a, write the Lewis structure of N2O (including resonance forms). Give the formal
charge on each atom and the hybridization of the central atom.
OS be described
c. How would the multiple bonding in SNqNOO
Q
in terms of orbitals?
51. Oxidation of the cyanide ion produces the stable cyanate ion,
OCN . The fulminate ion, CNO , on the other hand, is very unstable. Fulminate salts explode when struck; Hg(CNO)2 is used
in blasting caps. Write the Lewis structures and assign formal
charges for the cyanate and fulminate ions. Why is the fulminate
ion so unstable?
52. Sodium bismuthate (NaBiO3) is used to test for the presence of
Mn2 in solution by the following reaction:
Mn 2 1aq2  NaBiO3 1s2 ¡ MnO4 1aq2  BiO3 3 1aq2

Additional Exercises
a. Balance this equation.
b. Given that bismuth does not form double bonds with oxygen
in BiO3  and that NaBiO3 is relatively insoluble in water, what
type of structure must NaBiO3 have to account for this behavior?
53. Bacterial digestion is an economical method of sewage treatment.
The reaction
5CO2 1g2  55NH4  1aq2  76O2 1g2 ¬¡
C5H7O2N1s2  54NO2  1aq2  52H2O1l2  109H  1aq2
Bacteria

58. Phosphate buffers are important in regulating the pH of intracellular ﬂuids at pH values generally between 7.1 and 7.2. What is
the concentration ratio of H2PO4  to HPO4 2 in intracellular ﬂuid
at pH  7.15?
H2PO4  1aq2 ∆ HPO4 2 1aq2  H  1aq2

Ka  6.2  10 8

Why is a buffer composed of H3PO4 and H2PO4  ineffective in
buffering the pH of intracellular ﬂuid?
H3PO4 1aq2 ∆ H2PO4  1aq2  H  1aq2

Bacterial tissue

is an intermediate step in the conversion of the nitrogen in organic
compounds into nitrate ions. How much bacterial tissue is produced in a treatment plant for every 1.0  10 4 kg of wastewater
containing 3.0% NH4 ions by mass? Assume that 95% of the
ammonium ions are consumed by the bacteria.
54. An unknown element is a nonmetal and has a valence electron
conﬁguration of ns2np4.
a. How many valence electrons does this element have?
b. What are some possible identities for this element?
c. What is the formula of the compound this element would form
with lithium?
d. Would this element have a larger or smaller radius than barium?
e. Would this element have a greater or smaller ionization energy
than ﬂuorine?
55. The structure of TeF5  is

939

Ka  7.5  10 3

59. Commercial cold packs and hot packs are available for treating
athletic injuries. Both types contain a pouch of water and a dry
chemical. When the pack is struck, the pouch of water breaks, dissolving the chemical, and the solution becomes either hot or cold.
Many hot packs use magnesium sulfate, and many cold packs use
ammonium nitrate. Write reactions to show how these strong electrolytes break apart when they dissolve in water.
60. Classify each of the following as a strong acid or a weak acid.
H
O
Cl
a.

b.

c.

d.

S

F
F

F
79˚

   –
ðO
 OE O O
ð

A

Te
F

F

Draw a complete Lewis structure for TeF5 , and explain the distortion from the ideal square pyramidal structure.
56. Photogray lenses contain small embedded crystals of solid silver
chloride. Silver chloride is light-sensitive because of the reaction
hv
AgCl1s2 ¡
Ag1s2  Cl

Small particles of metallic silver cause the lenses to darken. In
the lenses this process is reversible. When the light is removed,
the reverse reaction occurs. However, when pure white silver chloride is exposed to sunlight it darkens; the reverse reaction does
not occur in the dark.
a. How do you explain this difference?
b. Photogray lenses do become permanently dark in time. How
do you account for this?
57. Ammonia is produced by the Haber process, in which nitrogen
and hydrogen are reacted directly using an iron mesh impregnated
with oxides as a catalyst. For the reaction
N2 1g2  3H2 1g2 ∆ 2NH3 1g2

equilibrium constants (Kp values) as a function of temperature are
300°C,
500°C,
600°C,

61. Consider the following Lewis structure where E is an unknown
element:

4.34  10 3
1.45  10 5
2.25  10 6

Is the reaction exothermic or endothermic?

ðO
ð

What are some possible identities for element E? Predict the molecular structure (including bond angles) for this ion.
62. Consider the following Lewis structure where E is an unknown
element:
½ k 2–
  DO
F O
E
ð
Gš
Fð


What are some possible identities for element E? Predict the molecular structure (including bond angles) for this ion.
63. The unit cell for a pure xenon ﬂuoride compound is shown below. What is the formula of the compound?

Xenon
Fluorine

940

Chapter Twenty The Representative Elements: Groups 5A Through 8A

Challenge Problems
64. Many structures of phosphorus-containing compounds are drawn
with some P “O bonds. These bonds are not the typical p bonds
we’ve considered, which involve the overlap of two p orbitals. Instead, they result from the overlap of a d orbital on the phosphorus atom with a p orbital on oxygen. This type of p bonding is
sometimes used as an explanation for why H3PO3 has the ﬁrst
structure below rather than the second:

P

3O2 1g2 ∆ 2O3 1g2

OH

O
H

Assuming a two-step mechanism, propose the second step in
the mechanism and give the overall balanced equation.
e. The activation energy for Cl-catalyzed destruction of ozone is
2.1 kJ/mol. Estimate the efﬁciency with which Cl atoms destroy ozone as compared with NO molecules at 25°C. Assume
that the frequency factor A is the same for each catalyzed
reaction and assume similar rate laws for each catalyzed
reaction.
68. Using data from Appendix 4, calculate ¢H°, ¢G°, and Kp (at 298
K) for the production of ozone from oxygen:

OH HO

OH

P
OH

Draw a picture showing how a d orbital and a p orbital overlap
to form a p bond.
65. Use bond energies (Table 8.4) to show that the preferred products
for the decomposition of N2O3 are NO2 and NO rather than O2
and N2O. (The N¬O single bond energy is 201 kJ/mol.) Hint:
Consider the reaction kinetics.
66. Sodium tripolyphosphate (Na5P3O10) is used in many synthetic detergents to soften the water by complexing Mg2 and Ca2 ions.
It also increases the efﬁciency of surfactants (wetting agents) that
lower a liquid’s surface tension. The K value for the formation of
MgP3O10 3 is 4.0  10 8. The reaction is

69.

70.

Mg 2  P3O10 5 ÷ MgP3O10 3
Calculate the concentration of Mg2 in a solution that was originally 50. ppm of Mg2 (50. mg/L of solution) after 40. g Na5P3O10
is added to 1.0 L of the solution.
67. One pathway for the destruction of ozone in the upper atmosphere is
O3 1g2  NO1g2 ¡ NO2 1g2  O2 1g2
NO2 1g2  O1g2 ¡ NO1g2  O2 1g2

Slow
Fast

Overall reaction: O3 1g2  O1g2 ¡ 2O2 1g2
a. Which species is a catalyst?
b. Which species is an intermediate?
c. The activation energy Ea for the uncatalyzed reaction

71.

O3 1g2  O1g2 ¡ 2O2 1g2
is 14.0 kJ. Ea for the same reaction when catalyzed by the presence of NO is 11.9 kJ. What is the ratio of the rate constant
for the catalyzed reaction to that for the uncatalyzed reaction
at 25°C? Assume that the frequency factor A is the same for
each reaction.
d. One of the concerns about the use of Freons is that they will
migrate to the upper atmosphere, where chlorine atoms can be
generated by the reaction
hv

CCl2F2 ¡ CF2Cl  Cl
Freon-12

Chlorine atoms also can act as a catalyst for the destruction of
ozone. The ﬁrst step of a proposed mechanism for chlorinecatalyzed ozone destruction is
Cl1g2  O3 1g2 ¡ ClO1g2  O2 1g2

Slow

72.

At 30 km above the surface of the earth, the temperature is about
230. K, and the partial pressure of oxygen is about 1.0  10 3
atm. Estimate the partial pressure of ozone in equilibrium with
oxygen at 30 km above the earth’s surface. Is it reasonable to
assume that the equilibrium between oxygen and ozone is
maintained under these conditions? Explain.
You travel to a distant, cold planet where the ammonia ﬂows like
water. In fact, the inhabitants of this planet use ammonia (an abundant liquid on their planet) much as earthlings use water. Ammonia is also similar to water in that it is amphoteric and undergoes
autoionization. The K value for the autoionization of ammonia is
1.8  10 12 at the standard temperature of the planet. What is the
pH of ammonia at this temperature?
Nitrogen gas reacts with hydrogen gas to form ammonia gas. You
have an equimolar mixture of nitrogen and hydrogen gases in a
15.0-L container ﬁtted with a piston in a room with a pressure of
1.00 atm. The piston apparatus allows the container volume to
change in order to keep the pressure constant at 1.00 atm. Assume
ideal behavior, constant temperature, and complete reaction.
a. What is the partial pressure of ammonia in the container when
the reaction is complete?
b. What is the mole fraction of ammonia in the container when
the reaction is complete?
c. What is the volume of the container when the reaction is complete?
A cylinder ﬁtted with a movable piston initially contains 2.00 mol
O2(g) and an unknown amount of SO2(g). The oxygen is known
to be in excess. The density of the mixture is 0.8000 g/L at some
T and P. After the reaction has gone to completion, forming SO3(g),
the density of the resulting gaseous mixture is 0.8471 g/L at the
same T and P. Calculate the mass of SO3 formed in the reaction.
One way to determine Ksp for the salt Ca(IO3)2 is to titrate it with
sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3). First, make a saturated solution of
calcium iodate. Then, add KI and a strong acid (hydrochloric acid
and sulfuric acid are generally used). The iodate ion will react according to the equation
IO3  5I   6H  ¡ 3I2  3H2O
Note that molecular iodine is a product of this reaction. Adding
a starch indicator will turn the solution of I2 a dark blue-black
color. A solution of sodium thiosulfate is added through a buret,
which reacts with iodine as follows:
I2  2S2O3 2 ¡ 2I   S4O6 2
The dark blue-black color disappears, when all of the I2 has reacted. This is the endpoint of the titration.

Marathon Problem
Consider starting with a 10.0-mL sample of a saturated calcium iodate solution. Upon titrating, you ﬁnd that 14.9 mL of
0.100 M Na2S2O3 is required to reach the end point of the titration. Calculate Ksp for Ca(IO3)2.

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

73. Although nitrogen triﬂuoride (NF3) is a thermally stable compound, nitrogen triiodide (NI3) is known to be a highly explosive
material. NI3 can be synthesized according to the equation
BN1s2  3IF1g2 ¡ BF3 1g2  NI3 1g2

a. What is the enthalpy of formation for NI3(s) given the enthalpy
of reaction (307 kJ) and the enthalpies of formation for
BN(s) (254 kJ/mol), IF(g) (96 kJ/mol), and BF3(g) (1136
kJ/mol)?
b. It is reported that when the synthesis of NI3 is conducted using 4 mol IF for every 1 mol BN, one of the by-products isolated is [IF2 ] [BF4 ] . What are the molecular geometries of
the species in this by-product? What are the hybridizations of
the central atoms in each species in the by-product?
74. While selenic acid has the formula H2SeO4 and thus is directly
related to sulfuric acid, telluric acid is best visualized as H6TeO6
or Te(OH)6.
a. What is the oxidation state of tellurium in Te(OH)6?
b. Despite its structural differences with sulfuric and selenic acid,
telluric acid is a diprotic acid with pKa1  7.68 and pKa2 
11.29. Telluric acid can be prepared by hydrolysis of tellurium
hexaﬂuoride according to the equation
TeF6 1g2  6H2O1l2 ¡ Te1OH2 6 1aq2  6HF1aq2
Tellurium hexaﬂuoride can be prepared by the reaction of
elemental tellurium with ﬂuorine gas:
Te1s2  3F2 1g2 ¡ TeF6 1g2
If a cubic block of tellurium (density  6.240 g/cm3) measuring
0.545 cm on edge is allowed to react with 2.34 L of ﬂuorine
gas at 1.06 atm and 25°C, what is the pH of a solution of
Te(OH)6 formed by dissolving the isolated TeF6(g) in 115 mL
of water?

Marathon Problem
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

75. Captain Kirk has set a trap for the Klingons who are threatening
an innocent planet. He has sent small groups of ﬁghter rockets to
sites that are invisible to Klingon radar and put a decoy in the

941

open. He calls this the “ﬁshhook” strategy. Mr. Spock has sent a
coded message to the chemists on the ﬁghters to tell the ships
what to do next. The outline of the message is
____ ____
____ ____
____ ____ ____ ____ ____
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
____ ____ ____ ____ ____
____ ____ ____ ____ ____
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10) (11) (12) (10) (11)
Fill in the blanks of the message using the following clues.
(1) Symbol of the halogen whose hydride has the second highest
boiling point in the series of HX compounds that are
hydrogen halides.
(2) Symbol of the halogen that is the only hydrogen halide, HX,
that is a weak acid in aqueous solution.
(3) Symbol of the element whose existence on the sun was
known before its existence on earth was discovered.
(4) Symbol of the element whose presence can interfere with
the qualitative analysis for Pb2, Hg22, and Ag. When
chloride ions are added to an aqueous solution of this metal
ion, a white precipitate forms with formula MOCl.
(5) Symbol of the Group 6A element that, like selenium, is a
semiconductor.
(6) Symbol for the element known in rhombic and monoclinic
forms.
(7) Symbol for the element that exists as diatomic molecules in
a yellow-green gas when not combined with another element; its silver, lead, and mercury(I) salts are white and
insoluble in water.
(8) Symbol for the most abundant element in and near the earth’s
crust.
(9) Symbol for the element that seems to give some protection
against cancer when a diet rich in this element is consumed.
(10) Symbol for the only noble gas besides xenon that has been
shown to form compounds under some circumstances (write
the symbol backward and split the letters as shown).
(11) Symbol for the toxic element that, like phosphorus and antimony, forms tetrameric molecules when uncombined with
other elements (split the letters of the symbol as shown).
(12) Symbol for the element that occurs as an inert component of
air but is a very prominent part of fertilizers and explosives.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

21

Transition Metals and
Coordination Chemistry

Contents
21.1 The Transition Metals:
A Survey
• General Properties
• Electron Conﬁgurations
• Oxidation States and
Ionization Energies
• Standard Reduction Potentials
• The 4d and 5d Transition
Series
21.2 The First-Row Transition
Metals
21.3 Coordination Compounds
• Coordination Number
• Ligands
• Nomenclature
21.4 Isomerism
• Structural Isomerism
• Stereoisomerism
21.5 Bonding in Complex Ions:
The Localized Electron Model
21.6 The Crystal Field Model
• Octahedral Complexes
• Other Coordination
Geometries
21.7 The Biologic Importance of
Coordination Complexes
21.8 Metallurgy and Iron and
Steel Production
• Hydrometallurgy
• The Metallurgy of Iron
• Production of Steel
• Heat Treatment of Steel

Copper ore deposit in Namibia.

942

T

ransition metals have many uses in our society. Iron is used for steel; copper for
electrical wiring and water pipes; titanium for paint; silver for photographic paper; manganese, chromium, vanadium, and cobalt as additives to steel; platinum for industrial and
automotive catalysts; and so on.
One indication of the importance of transition metals is the great concern shown by
the U.S. government for continuing the supply of these elements. In recent years the United
States has been a net importer of about 60 “strategic and critical” minerals, including
cobalt, manganese, platinum, palladium, and chromium. All these metals play a vital role
in the U.S. economy and defense, and approximately 90% of the required amounts must
be imported (see Table 21.1).
In addition to being important in industry, transition metal ions play a vital role in
living organisms. For example, complexes of iron provide for the transport and storage of
oxygen, molybdenum and iron compounds are catalysts in nitrogen ﬁxation, zinc is found
in more than 150 biomolecules in humans, copper and iron play a crucial role in the
respiratory cycle, and cobalt is found in essential biomolecules such as vitamin B12.
In this chapter we explore the general properties of transition metals, paying particular
attention to the bonding, structure, and properties of the complex ions of these metals.

21.1

The Transition Metals: A Survey

General Properties
One striking characteristic of the representative elements is that their chemistry changes
markedly across a given period as the number of valence electrons changes. The chemical similarities occur mainly within the vertical groups. In contrast, the transition metals
show great similarities within a given period as well as within a given vertical group.
This difference occurs because the last electrons added for transition metals are inner electrons: d electrons for the d-block transition metals and f electrons for the lanthanides and
actinides. These inner d and f electrons cannot participate as easily in bonding as can the
valence s and p electrons. Thus the chemistry of the transition elements is not affected
as greatly by the gradual change in the number of electrons as is the chemistry of the
representative elements.
Group designations are traditionally given on the periodic table for the d-block transition metals (see Fig. 21.1). However, these designations do not relate as directly to the

TABLE 21.1 Some Transition Metals Important to the U.S. Economy and Defense
Metal

Uses

Chromium

Stainless steel (especially for parts exposed
to corrosive gases and high temperatures)
High-temperature alloys in jet engines,
magnets, catalysts, drill bits
Steelmaking
Catalysts

Cobalt
Manganese
Platinum and
palladium

Percentage Imported
91%
93%
97%
87%

943

944

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Y

Zr

Nb Mo

Tc

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

La

Hf

Ta

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au

Hg

Ac

Rf

Db

Sg

Bh

Hs

Mt

Ds

Rg Uub

Eu

Gd

Tb

Dy

Ho

Er

Tm Yb

Lu

Pu Am Cm Bk

Cf

Es

Fm Md No

Lr

Ce

Pr

Nd Pm Sm

Th

Pa

U

Np

chemical behavior of these elements as they do for the representative elements (the A
groups), so we will not use them.
As a class, the transition metals behave as typical metals, possessing metallic luster
and relatively high electrical and thermal conductivities. Silver is the best conductor of
heat and electric current. However, copper is a close second, which explains copper’s wide
use in the electrical systems of homes and factories.

d-block transition elements

FIGURE 21.1
The position of the transition elements on
the periodic table. The d-block elements
correspond to ﬁlling the 3d, 4d, 5d, or 6d
orbitals. The inner transition metals correspond to ﬁlling the 4f (lanthanides) or 5f
(actinides) orbitals.

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Y

Zr

Nb

Mo

Tc

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

La*

Hf

Ta

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au

Hg

Ac†

Rf

Db

Sg

Bh

Hs

Mt

Ds

Rg Uub

f-block transition elements
*Lanthanides

Ce

Pr

Nd

Pm Sm

Eu

Gd

Tb

Dy

Ho

Er

Tm

Yb

Lu

†Actinides

Th

Pa

U

Np

Am Cm

Bk

Cf

Es

Fm Md

No

Lr

Pu

21.1

The Transition Metals: A Survey

945

Sterling silver candlesticks and bowl
from Japan.

Despite their many similarities, the transition metals do vary considerably in certain
properties. For example, tungsten has a melting point of 3400°C and is used for ﬁlaments
in light bulbs; mercury is a liquid at 25°C. Some transition metals such as iron and titanium
are hard and strong and make very useful structural materials; others such as copper, gold,
and silver are relatively soft. The chemical reactivity of the transition metals also varies
signiﬁcantly. Some react readily with oxygen to form oxides. Of these metals, some, such
as chromium, nickel, and cobalt, form oxides that adhere tightly to the metallic surface,
protecting the metal from further oxidation. Others, such as iron, form oxides that scale
off, constantly exposing new metal to the corrosion process. On the other hand, the noble metals—primarily gold, silver, platinum, and palladium—do not readily form oxides.
In forming ionic compounds with nonmetals, the transition metals exhibit several typical characteristics:
More than one oxidation state is often found. For example, iron combines with chlorine to form FeCl2 and FeCl3.
The cations are often complex ions, species where the transition metal ion is surrounded
by a certain number of ligands (molecules or ions that behave as Lewis bases). For example, the compound [Co(NH3)6]Cl3 contains the Co(NH3)63 cation and Cl anions.
3+

NH3
NH3
NH3

NH3
Co

NH3

NH3
The Co(NH3)63+ ion

946

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

(clockwise from upper left) Calcite stalactites colored by traces of iron. Quartz is
often colored by the presence of transition
metals such as Mn, Fe, and Ni. Wulfenite
contains PbMoO4. Rhodochrosite is a
mineral containing MnCO3.

Most compounds are colored, because the transition metal ion in the complex ion can
absorb visible light of speciﬁc wavelengths.
Many compounds are paramagnetic (they contain unpaired electrons).
In this chapter we will concentrate on the ﬁrst-row transition metals (scandium
through zinc) because they are representative of the other transition series and because
they have great practical signiﬁcance. Some important properties of these elements are
summarized in Table 21.2 and are discussed in the next section.

Electron Conﬁgurations

(from left to right) Aqueous solutions containing the metal ions Co2, Mn2, Cr3,
Fe3, and Ni2.

The electron conﬁgurations of the ﬁrst-row transition metals were discussed in Section 7.11. The 3d orbitals begin to ﬁll after the 4s orbital is complete, that is, after calcium ([Ar]4s2). The ﬁrst transition metal, scandium, has one electron in the 3d orbitals;
the second, titanium, has two; and the third, vanadium, has three. We would expect
chromium, the fourth transition metal, to have the electron conﬁguration [Ar]4s23d 4. However, the actual conﬁguration is [Ar]4s13d5, which shows a half-ﬁlled 4s orbital and a halfﬁlled set of 3d orbitals (one electron in each of the ﬁve 3d orbitals). It is tempting to say
that the conﬁguration results because half-ﬁlled “shells” are especially stable. Although
there are some reasons to think that this explanation might be valid, it is an oversimpliﬁcation. For instance, tungsten, which is in the same vertical group as chromium, has the
conﬁguration [Xe]6s24f 145d 4, where half-ﬁlled s and d shells are not found. There are
several similar cases.
Basically, the chromium conﬁguration occurs because the energies of the 3d and 4s
orbitals are very similar for the ﬁrst-row transition elements. We saw in Section 7.11 that
when electrons are placed in a set of degenerate orbitals, they ﬁrst occupy each orbital

21.1

TABLE 21.2

The Transition Metals: A Survey

947

Selected Properties of the First-Row Transition Metals

Atomic
number
Electron
conﬁguration*
Atomic
radius (pm)
Ionization
energies
(eV/atom)
First
Second
Third
Reduction
potential† (V)
Common
oxidation
states
Melting
point (°C)
Density
(g/cm3)
Electrical
conductivity‡

Scandium

Titanium

Vanadium

Chromium

Manganese

Iron

Cobalt

Nickel

Copper

Zinc

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

4s23d1

4s23d 2

4s23d 3

4s13d 5

4s23d 5

4s23d6

4s23d 7

4s23d 8

4s13d 10

4s23d 10

162

147

134

130

135

126

125

124

128

138

6.54
12.80
24.76
2.08

6.82
13.58
27.49
1.63

6.74
14.65
29.31
1.2

6.77
16.50
30.96
0.91

7.44
15.64
33.67
1.18

7.87
16.18
30.65
0.44

7.86
17.06
33.50
0.28

7.64
18.17
35.17
0.23

7.73
20.29
36.83
0.34

9.39
17.96
39.72
0.76

3

2,3,
4

2,3,
4,5

2,3,
6

2,3,
4,7

2,3

2,3

2

1,2

2

1397

1672

1710

1900

1244

1530

1495

1455

1083

419

2.99

4.49

5.96

7.20

7.43

7.86

8.9

8.90

8.92

7.14

—

2

3

10

2

17

24

24

97

27

*Each atom has an argon inner-core conﬁguration.
†For the reduction process M2  2e n M (except for scandium, where the ion is Sc3).
‡Compared with an arbitrarily assigned value of 100 for silver.

Chromium has the electron conﬁguration
[Ar]4s13d 5.

singly to minimize electron repulsions. Since the 4s and 3d orbitals are virtually degenerate
in the chromium atom, we would expect the conﬁguration
__
4s 앖

__ 앖
__ 앖
__ 앖
__ 앖
__
3d 앖

앗
__
4s 앖

__ 앖
__ 앖
__ 앖
__ __
3d 앖

rather than
A set of orbitals with the same energy is
said to be degenerate.

Copper has the electron conﬁguration
[Ar]4s13d 10.
In transition metal ions, the 3d orbitals
are lower in energy than the 4s orbitals.

since the second arrangement has greater electron–electron repulsions and thus a higher
energy.
The only other unexpected conﬁguration among the ﬁrst-row transition metals is that
of copper, which is [Ar]4s13d 10 rather than the expected [Ar]4s23d 9.
In contrast to the neutral transition metals, where the 3d and 4s orbitals have very
similar energies, the energy of the 3d orbitals in transition metal ions is signiﬁcantly less
than that of the 4s orbital. This means that the electrons remaining after the ion is formed
occupy the 3d orbitals, since they are lower in energy. First-row transition metal ions do
not have 4s electrons. For example, manganese has the conﬁguration [Ar]4s23d5, while
that of Mn2 is [Ar]3d5. The neutral titanium atom has the conﬁguration [Ar]4s23d2, while
that of Ti3 is [Ar]3d1.

Oxidation States and Ionization Energies
The transition metals can form a variety of ions by losing one or more electrons. The
common oxidation states of these elements are shown in Table 21.2. Note that for the

948

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
40

Ionization energy (eV/atom)

35

FIGURE 21.2
Plots of the ﬁrst (red dots) and third (blue
dots) ionization energies for the ﬁrst-row
transition metals.

30
25
20
15
10
5
Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

ﬁrst ﬁve metals the maximum possible oxidation state corresponds to the loss of all
the 4s and 3d electrons. For example, the maximum oxidation state of chromium
([Ar]4s13d 5) is 6. Toward the right end of the period, the maximum oxidation states
are not observed; in fact, the 2 ions are the most common. The higher oxidation states
are not seen for these metals because the 3d orbitals become lower in energy as the
nuclear charge increases, and the electrons become increasingly difﬁcult to remove.
From Table 21.2 we see that ionization energy increases gradually going from left to
right across the period. However, the third ionization energy (when an electron is
removed from a 3d orbital) increases faster than the ﬁrst ionization energy, clear
evidence of the signiﬁcant decrease in the energy of the 3d orbitals going across the
period (see Fig. 21.2).

Standard Reduction Potentials
When a metal acts as a reducing agent, the half-reaction is
M ¡ Mn  ne

TABLE 21.3 Relative Reducing
Abilities of the First-Row
Transition Metals in Aqueous
Solution

2.08
1.63
1.2
1.18
0.91
0.76
0.44
0.28
0.23
0.34

2H  2e ¡ H2
all the metals except copper can reduce H ions to hydrogen gas in 1 M aqueous solutions of strong acid:
M1s2  2H 1aq2 ¡ H2 1g2  M2 1aq2

Reducing ability

Sc n Sc3  3e
Ti n Ti2  2e
V n V2  2e
Mn n Mn2  2e
Cr n Cr2  2e
Zn n Zn2  2e
Fe n Fe2  2e
Co n Co2  2e
Ni n Ni2  2e
Cu n Cu2  2e

Potential (V)

88888888888888n

Reaction

This is the reverse of the conventional listing for half-reactions in tables. Thus, to rank
the transition metals in order of reducing ability, it is most convenient to reverse the reactions and the signs given in Table 21.2. The metal with the most positive potential is
then the best reducing agent. The transition metals are listed in order of reducing ability
in Table 21.3.
Since e° is zero for the process

As Table 21.3 shows, the reducing abilities of the ﬁrst-row transition metals generally decrease going from left to right across the period. Only chromium and zinc do not follow
this trend.

The 4d and 5d Transition Series
In comparing the 3d, 4d, and 5d transition series, it is instructive to consider the atomic
radii of these elements (Fig. 21.3). Note that there is a general, although not regular,

21.2

The First-Row Transition Metals

949

0.2
La
1st series (3d)

Atomic radii (nm)

Y

FIGURE 21.3
Atomic radii of the 3d, 4d, and 5d transition series.

Niobium was originally called columbium
and is still occasionally referred to by
that name.

2nd series (4d)
Hf
Zr

Sc
0.15

3rd series (5d)
Ta
Nb

Ti

W
Mo

Re
Tc

Os
Ru

Mn

Fe

V
Cr

Au
Ag
Ir

Pt

Rh

Pd

Co

Ni

Cu

0.1
Atomic number

decrease in size going from left to right for each of the series. Also note that although
there is a signiﬁcant increase in radius in going from the 3d to the 4d metals, the 4d and
5d metals are remarkably similar in size. This latter phenomenon is the result of the
lanthanide contraction. In the lanthanide series, consisting of the elements between lanthanum and hafnium (see Fig. 21.1), electrons are ﬁlling the 4f orbitals. Since the 4f orbitals are buried in the interior of these atoms, the additional electrons do not add to the
atomic size. In fact, the increasing nuclear charge (remember that a proton is added to the
nucleus for each electron) causes the radii of the lanthanide elements to decrease significantly going from left to right. This lanthanide contraction just offsets the normal increase
in size due to going from one principal quantum level to another. Thus the 5d elements,
instead of being signiﬁcantly larger than the 4d elements, are almost identical to them in
size. This leads to a great similarity in the chemistry of the 4d and 5d elements in a given
vertical group. For example, the chemical properties of hafnium and zirconium are
remarkably similar, and they always occur together in nature. Their separation, which is
probably more difﬁcult than the separation of any other pair of elements, often requires
fractional distillation of their compounds.
In general, the differences between the 4d and 5d elements in a group increase gradually going from left to right. For example, niobium and tantalum are also quite similar,
but less so than zirconium and hafnium.
Although generally less well known than the 3d elements, the 4d and 5d transition
metals have certain very useful properties. For example, zirconium and zirconium oxide
(ZrO2) have great resistance to high temperatures and are used, along with niobium and
molybdenum alloys, for space vehicle parts that are exposed to high temperatures during
reentry into the earth’s atmosphere. Niobium and molybdenum are also important alloying
materials for certain types of steel. Tantalum, which has a high resistance to attack by body
ﬂuids, is often used for replacement of bones. The platinum group metals—ruthenium,
osmium, rhodium, iridium, palladium, and platinum—are all quite similar and are widely
used as catalysts for many types of industrial processes.

21.2

The First-Row Transition Metals

We have seen that the transition metals are similar in many ways but also show important differences. We will now explore some of the speciﬁc properties of each of the 3d
transition metals.
Scandium is a rare element that exists in compounds mainly in the 3 oxidation
state—for example, in ScCl3, Sc2O3, and Sc2(SO4)3. The chemistry of scandium strongly
resembles that of the lanthanides, with most of its compounds being colorless and

950

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

An X ray of a patient who has had a hip replacement. The normal hip joint is on the
left; the hip joint constructed from tantalum metal is on the right.

diamagnetic. This is not surprising; as we will see in Section 21.6, the color and magnetism of transition metal compounds usually arise from the d electrons on the metal ion,
and Sc3 has no d electrons. Scandium metal, which can be prepared by electrolysis of
molten ScCl3, is not widely used because of its rarity, but it is found in some electronic
devices, such as high-intensity lamps.
Titanium is widely distributed in the earth’s crust (0.6% by mass). Because of its relatively low density and high strength, titanium is an excellent structural material, especially in jet engines, where light weight and stability at high temperatures are required.
Nearly 5000 kg of titanium alloys is used in each engine of a Boeing 747 jetliner. In addition, the resistance of titanium to chemical attack makes it a useful material for pipes,
pumps, and reaction vessels in the chemical industry.
The most familiar compound of titanium is no doubt responsible for the white
color of this paper. Titanium dioxide, or more correctly, titanium(IV) oxide (TiO2), is a
highly opaque substance used as the white pigment in paper, paint, linoleum, plastics, synthetic ﬁbers, whitewall tires, and cosmetics (sunscreens, for example). Approximately
700,000 tons is used annually in these and other products. Titanium(IV) oxide is widely
dispersed in nature, but the main ores are rutile (impure TiO2) and ilmenite (FeTiO3).
Rutile is processed by treatment with chlorine to form volatile TiCl4, which is separated
from the impurities and burned to form TiO2:
TiCl4 1g2  O2 1g2 ¡ TiO2 1s2  2Cl2 1g2
Ilmenite is treated with sulfuric acid to form a soluble sulfate:
FeTiO3 1s2  2H2SO4 1aq2 ¡ Fe2 1aq2  TiO2 1aq2  2SO42 1aq2  2H2O1l2
When this aqueous mixture is allowed to stand, under vacuum, solid FeSO4  7H2O forms
ﬁrst and is removed. The mixture is then heated, and the insoluble titanium(IV) oxide
hydrate (TiO2  H2O) forms. The water of hydration is driven off by heating to form
pure TiO2:
TiO2  H2O1s2 ¡ TiO2 1s2  H2O1g2
Heat

In its compounds, titanium is most often found in the 4 oxidation state. Examples
are TiO2 and TiCl4, the latter a colorless liquid (bp  137°C) that fumes in moist air to
produce TiO2:
TiCl4 1l2  2H2O1l2 ¡ TiO2 1s2  4HCl1g2
Ti(H2O)63 is purple in solution.

The manufacture of sulfuric acid was
discussed at the end of Chapter 3.
The most common oxidation state for
vanadium is 5.

Titanium(III) compounds can be produced by reduction of the 4 state. In aqueous solution, Ti3 exists as the purple Ti(H2O)63 ion, which is slowly oxidized to titanium(IV)
by air. Titanium(II) is not stable in aqueous solution but does exist in the solid state in
compounds such as TiO and the dihalides of general formula TiX2.
Vanadium is widely spread throughout the earth’s crust (0.02% by mass). It is used
mostly in alloys with other metals such as iron (80% of vanadium is used in steel) and titanium. Vanadium(V) oxide (V2O5) is used as an industrial catalyst in the production of
materials such as sulfuric acid.
Pure vanadium can be obtained from the electrolytic reduction of fused salts,
such as VCl2, to produce a metal similar to titanium that is steel gray, hard, and
corrosion resistant. Often the pure element is not required for alloying. For example,
ferrovanadium, produced by the reduction of a mixture of V2O5 and Fe2O3 with
aluminum, is added to iron to form vanadium steel, a hard steel used for engine parts
and axles.
The principal oxidation state of vanadium is 5, found in compounds such as the orange V2O5 (mp  650°C) and the colorless VF5 (mp  19.5°C). The oxidation states
from 5 to 2 all exist in aqueous solution (see Table 21.4). The higher oxidation states,

21.2

The First-Row Transition Metals

951

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Titanium Dioxide—Miracle Coating
itanium dioxide, more properly called titanium(IV) oxide, is a very important material. Approximately 1.5 million tons of the substance is produced each year in the United
States for use as a pigment in paper and paints and as a
component of sunscreens.
In recent years, however, scientists have found a new use
for TiO2. When surfaces are coated with titanium dioxide, they
become resistant to dirt and bacteria. For example, the
Pilkington Glass Company is now making glass coated with
TiO2 that cleans itself. All the glass needs is sun and rain to
keep itself clean. The self-cleaning action arises from two effects. First, the coating of TiO2 acts as a catalyst in the presence of ultraviolet (UV) light to break down carbon-based
pollutants to carbon dioxide and water. Second, because TiO2
reduces surface tension, rainwater “sheets” instead of forming droplets on the glass, thereby washing away the grime on
the surface of the glass. Although this self-cleaning glass is
bad news for window washers, it could save millions of dollars in maintenance costs for owners of commercial buildings.

T

TABLE 21.4 Oxidation States
and Species for Vanadium in
Aqueous Solution
Species in Aqueous
Solution

5
4
3
2

VO2 (yellow)
VO2 (blue)
V3(aq) (blue-green)
V2(aq) (violet)

5 and 4, do not exist as hydrated ions of the type Vn(aq) because the highly charged
ion causes the attached water molecules to be very acidic. The H ions are lost to give
the oxycations VO2 and VO2. The hydrated V3 and V2 ions are easily oxidized and
thus can function as reducing agents in aqueous solution.
Although chromium is relatively rare, it is a very important industrial material. The
chief ore of chromium is chromite (FeCr2O4), which can be reduced by carbon to give
ferrochrome,
FeCr2O4 1s2  4C1s2 ¡ Fe1s2  2Cr1s2  4CO1g2
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Oxidation
State of
Vanadium

Because the TiO2-treated glass requires UV light for its
action, it does not work well for interior surfaces where UV
light is present only in small amounts. However, a team of
Japanese researchers has found that if the TiO2 coating is
doped with nitrogen atoms, it will catalyze the breakdown
of dirt in the presence of visible light as well as UV light.
Studies also show that this N-doped TiO2 surface coating
kills many types of bacteria in the presence of visible or
ultraviolet light. This discovery could lead to products such
as self-sterilizing bathroom tiles, counters, and toilets. In
addition, because the TiO2 on the surface of glass has such
a strong attraction for water molecules (greatly lowering
the surface tension), water does not bead up to form droplets.
Just as this effect produces sheeting action on exterior
glass, so it prevents interior windows and mirrors from
“fogging up.”
Titanium dioxide, a cheap and plentiful material, may
prove to be worth its weight in gold as a surface coating.

Ferrochrome

TABLE 21.5 Typical Chromium
Compounds
Oxidation
State of
Chromium
2
3
6

Examples of
Compounds
(X  halogen)
CrX2
CrX3
Cr2O3 (green)
Cr(OH)3 (blue-green)
K2Cr2O7 (orange)
Na2CrO4 (yellow)
CrO3 (red)

which can be added directly to iron in the steelmaking process. Chromium metal, which
is often used to plate steel, is hard and brittle and maintains a bright surface by developing
a tough invisible oxide coating.
Chromium commonly forms compounds in which it has the oxidation state 2, 3,
or 6, as shown in Table 21.5. The Cr2 (chromous) ion is a powerful reducing agent in
aqueous solution. In fact, traces of O2 in other gases can be removed by bubbling through
a Cr2 solution:
4Cr2 1aq2  O2 1g2  4H 1aq2 ¡ 4Cr3 1aq2  2H2O1l2
The chromium(VI) species are excellent oxidizing agents, especially in acidic solution, where chromium(VI) as the dichromate ion (Cr2O72 ) is reduced to the Cr3 ion:
Cr2O72 1aq2  14H 1aq2  6e ¡ 2Cr3 1aq2  7H2O1l2

e°  1.33 V

952

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Titanium Makes Great Bicycles
ne of the most interesting characteristics of the world
of bicycling is the competition among various frame materials. Bicycle frames are now built from steel, aluminum,
carbon ﬁber composites, and titanium, with each material
having advantages and disadvantages. Steel is strong, economical, adaptable, and (unfortunately) “rustable.” Aluminum
is light and stiff but has relatively low fatigue limits (resistance to repeated stresses). Carbon ﬁber composites have amazing strength-to-mass ratios and have shock- and vibrationdampening properties superior to any metal; however, they
are very expensive. Titanium has a density approximately
43% less than that of steel, a yield strength (when alloyed
with metals such as aluminum and tin) that is 30% greater
than that of steel, an extraordinary resistance to fatigue, and
a high resistance to corrosion, but it is expensive and difﬁcult to work.
Of all these materials, titanium gives the bicycle that fanatics seem to love the most. After their ﬁrst ride on a bicycle with a titanium frame, most experienced cyclists ﬁnd
themselves shaking their heads and searching hard for the

O

right words to describe the experience. Typically, the word
“magic” is used a great deal in the ensuing description.
The magic of titanium results from its combination of
toughness, stretchability, and resilience. A bicycle that is
built stiff to resist pedaling loads usually responds by giving a harsh, uncomfortable ride. A titanium bike is very stiff
against high pedaling torques, but it seems to transmit much
less road shock than bikes made of competitive materials.
Why titanium excels in dampening vibrations is not entirely
clear. Despite titanium’s signiﬁcantly lower density than
steel, shock waves travel more slowly in titanium than in
steel. Whatever the explanation for its shock-absorbing abilities, titanium provides three things that cyclists ﬁnd crucial:
light weight, stiffness, and a smooth ride—magic.
Titanium is quite abundant in the earth’s crust, ranking
ninth of all the elements and second among the transition
elements. The metallurgy of titanium presents special challenges. Carbon, the reducing agent most commonly used to
obtain metals from their oxide ores, cannot be used because
it forms intractable interstitial carbides with titanium. These

The oxidizing ability of the dichromate ion is strongly pH-dependent, increasing as [H]
increases, as predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle. In basic solution, chromium(VI) exists
as the chromate ion, a much less powerful oxidizing agent:
CrO42 1aq2  4H2O1l2  3e ¡ Cr1OH2 3 1s2  5OH 1aq2
Cr2O72

e°  0.13 V

CrO42

The structures of the
and
ions are shown in Fig. 21.4.
Red chromium(VI) oxide (CrO3) dissolves in water to give a strongly acidic, red-orange
solution:
2CrO3 1s2  H2O1l2 ¡ 2H 1aq2  Cr2O72 1aq2

F

O

O

FIGURE 21.4
The structures of the chromium(VI) anions:
(a) Cr2O72 , which exists in acidic solution,
and (b) CrO42 , which exists in basic
solution.

Cr

115°

O

(a)

2–

O

Cr
O

O
O

2–

O Cr

O

O
(b)

O

21.2

carbides are extraordinarily hard and have melting points
close to 3000°C. However, if chlorine gas is used in conjunction with carbon to treat the ore, volatile TiCl4 is formed,
which can be distilled off and then reduced with magnesium
or sodium at approximately 1000°C to form a titanium
“sponge.” This sponge is then ground up, cleaned with aqua
regia (a 1:3 mixture of concentrated HNO3 and concentrated
HCl), melted under a blanket of inert gas (to prevent reaction with oxygen), and cast into ingots. Titanium, a lustrous,
silvery metal with a high melting point (1667°C), crystallizes in a hexagonal closest packed structure. Because titanium tends to become quite brittle when trace impurities
such as C, N, and O are present, it must be fabricated with
great care.
Titanium’s unusual ability to stretch makes it hard to
machine. It tends to push away even from a very sharp cutting blade, giving a rather unpredictable ﬁnal dimension.
Also, because titanium is embrittled by reaction with oxygen, all welding operations must be carried out under a
shielding gas such as argon.
However, the bicycle that results is worth all these difﬁculties. One woman described a titanium bicycle as “the
one God rides on Sunday.”

TABLE 21.6 Some Compounds
of Manganese in Its Most
Common Oxidation States
Oxidation
State of
Manganese
2

4
7

Examples of
Compounds
Mn(OH)2 (pink)
MnS (salmon)
MnSO4 (reddish)
MnCl2 (pink)
MnO2 (dark brown)
KMnO4 (purple)

The First-Row Transition Metals

953

A titanium bicycle.

It is possible to precipitate bright orange dichromate salts, such as K2Cr2O7, from these
solutions. When made basic, the solution turns yellow, and chromate salts such as Na2CrO4
can be obtained. A mixture of chromium(VI) oxide and concentrated sulfuric acid, commonly called cleaning solution, is a powerful oxidizing medium that can remove organic
materials from analytical glassware, yielding a very clean surface.
Manganese is relatively abundant (0.1% of the earth’s crust), although no signiﬁcant
sources are found in the United States. The most common use of manganese is in the production of an especially hard steel used for rock crushers, bank vaults, and armor plate.
One interesting source of manganese is from manganese nodules found on the ocean ﬂoor.
These roughly spherical “rocks” contain mixtures of manganese and iron oxides as well
as smaller amounts of other metals such as cobalt, nickel, and copper. Apparently, the
nodules were formed at least partly by the action of marine organisms. Because of the
abundance of these nodules, there is much interest in developing economical methods for
their recovery and processing.
Manganese can exist in all oxidation states from 2 to 7, although 2 and 7 are
the most common. Manganese(II) forms an extensive series of salts with all the common
anions. In aqueous solution Mn2 forms Mn(H2O)62, which has a light pink color. Manganese(VII) is found in the intensely purple permanganate ion (MnO4). Widely used as
an analytical reagent in acidic solution, the MnO4 ion behaves as a strong oxidizing
agent, with the manganese becoming Mn2:
MnO4 1aq2  8H 1aq2  5e ¡ Mn2 1aq2  4H2O1l2
Several typical compounds of manganese are shown in Table 21.6.

e°  1.51 V

954

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

TABLE 21.7 Typical Compounds
of Iron
Oxidation
State of
Iron
2

3

2, 3
(mixture)

Examples of
Compounds
FeO (black)
FeS (brownish
black)
FeSO4  7H2O
(green)
K4Fe(CN)6
(yellow)
FeCl3 (brownish
black)
Fe2O3 (reddish
brown)
K3Fe(CN)6 (red)
Fe(SCN)3 (red)
Fe3O4 (black)
KFe[Fe(CN)6]
(deep blue,
“Prussian blue”)

Iron is the most abundant heavy metal (4.7% of the earth’s crust) and the most important to our civilization. It is a white, lustrous, not particularly hard metal that is very
reactive toward oxidizing agents. For example, in moist air it is rapidly oxidized by oxygen to form rust, a mixture of iron oxides.
The chemistry of iron mainly involves its 2 and 3 oxidation states. Typical
compounds are shown in Table 21.7. In aqueous solutions iron(II) salts are generally
light green because of the presence of Fe(H2O)62. Although the Fe(H2O)63 ion is colorless, aqueous solutions of iron(III) salts are usually yellow to brown in color due to
the presence of Fe(OH)(H2O)52, which results from the acidity of Fe(H2O)63 (Ka 
6  103):
Fe1H2O2 63 1aq2 ∆ Fe1OH21H2O2 52 1aq2  H 1aq2

Although cobalt is relatively rare, it is found in ores such as smaltite (CoAs2)
and cobaltite (CoAsS) in large enough concentrations to make its production economically feasible. Cobalt is a hard, bluish white metal mainly used in alloys such as stainless steel and stellite, an alloy of iron, copper, and tungsten that is used in surgical
instruments.
The chemistry of cobalt involves mainly its 2 and 3 oxidation states, although
compounds containing cobalt in the 0, 1, or 4 oxidation state are known. Aqueous
solutions of cobalt(II) salts contain the Co(H2O)62 ion, which has a characteristic rose
color. Cobalt forms a wide variety of coordination compounds, many of which will be
discussed in later sections of this chapter. Some typical cobalt compounds are shown in
Table 21.8.
Nickel, which ranks twenty-fourth in elemental abundance in the earth’s crust, is found
in ores, where it is combined mainly with arsenic, antimony, and sulfur. Nickel metal, a
silvery white substance with high electrical and thermal conductivities, is quite resistant
to corrosion and is often used for plating more active metals. Nickel is also widely used
in the production of alloys such as steel.
Nickel in compounds is almost exclusively in the 2 oxidation state. Aqueous solutions of nickel(II) salts contain the Ni(H2O)62 ion, which has a characteristic emerald
green color. Coordination compounds of nickel(II) will be discussed later in this chapter.
Some typical nickel compounds are shown in Table 21.9.

TABLE 21.8
of Cobalt
Oxidation
State
2

3

An aqueous solution containing the
Ni2 ion.

Typical Compounds
Examples of
Compounds
CoSO4 (dark blue)
[Co(H2O)6]Cl2
(pink)
[Co(H2O)6](NO3)2
(red)
CoS (black)
CoO (greenish
brown)
CoF3 (brown)
Co2O3 (charcoal)
K3[Co(CN)6]
(yellow)
[Co(NH3)6]Cl3
(yellow)

TABLE 21.9
of Nickel
Oxidation
State of
Nickel
2

Typical Compounds

Examples of
Compounds
NiCl2 (yellow)
[Ni(H2O)6]Cl2
(green)
NiO (greenish
black)
NiS (black)
[Ni(H2O)6]SO4
(green)
[Ni(NH3)6](NO3)2
(blue)

21.3

TABLE 21.10

Copper roofs and bronze statues, such as
the Statue of Liberty, turn green in air
because Cu3(OH)4SO4 and Cu4(OH)6SO4
form.

Coordination Compounds

955

Alloys Containing Copper

Alloy

Composition (% by mass in parentheses)

Brass
Bronze
Sterling silver
Gold (18-karat)
Gold (14-karat)

Cu
Cu
Cu
Cu
Cu

(20–97), Zn (2–80), Sn (0–14), Pb (0–12), Mn (0–25)
(50–98), Sn (0–35), Zn (0–29), Pb (0–50), P (0–3)
(7.5), Ag (92.5)
(5–15), Au (75), Ag (10–20)
(12–28), Au (58), Ag (4–30)

Copper, widely distributed in nature in ores containing sulﬁdes, arsenides, chlorides,
and carbonates, is valued for its high electrical conductivity and its resistance to corrosion. It is widely used for plumbing, and 50% of all copper produced annually is used for
electrical applications. Copper is a major constituent in several well-known alloys (see
Table 21.10).
Although copper is not highly reactive (it will not reduce H to H2, for example), the
reddish metal does slowly corrode in air, producing the characteristic green patina consisting of basic copper sulfate
3Cu1s2  2H2O1l2  SO2 1g2  2O2 1g2 ¡ Cu3 1OH2 4SO4
Basic copper sulfate

TABLE 21.11 Typical
Compounds of Copper
Oxidation
State of
Copper
1
2

Examples of
Compounds
Cu2O (red)
Cu2S (black)
CuCl (white)
CuO (black)
CuSO4  5H2O (blue)
CuCl2  2H2O (green)
[Cu(H2O)6](NO3)2
(blue)

and other similar compounds.
The chemistry of copper principally involves the 2 oxidation state, but many compounds containing copper(I) are also known. Aqueous solutions of copper(II) salts are a
characteristic bright blue color due to the presence of the Cu(H2O)62 ion. Table 21.11
lists some typical copper compounds.
Although trace amounts of copper are essential for life, copper in large amounts is
quite toxic; copper salts are used to kill bacteria, fungi, and algae. For example, paints
containing copper are used on ship hulls to prevent fouling by marine organisms.
Widely dispersed in the earth’s crust, zinc is mainly reﬁned from sphalerite (ZnS),
which often occurs with galena (PbS). Zinc is a white, lustrous, very active metal that
behaves as an excellent reducing agent and tarnishes rapidly. About 90% of the zinc
produced is used for galvanizing steel. Zinc forms colorless salts in the 2 oxidation
state.

21.3

Coordination Compounds

Transition metal ions characteristically form coordination compounds, which are usually colored and often paramagnetic. A coordination compound typically consists of
a complex ion, a transition metal ion with its attached ligands (see Section 15.8), and
counterions, anions or cations as needed to produce a compound with no net charge.
The substance [Co(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 is a typical coordination compound. The brackets indicate the composition of the complex ion, in this case Co(NH3)5Cl2, and the two Cl
counterions are shown outside the brackets. Note that in this compound one Cl acts
as a ligand along with the ﬁve NH3 molecules. In the solid state this compound
consists of the large Co(NH3)5Cl2 cations and twice as many Cl anions, all packed
together as efﬁciently as possible. When dissolved in water, the solid behaves like
any ionic solid; the cations and anions are assumed to separate and move about
independently:
3Co1NH3 2 5Cl4Cl2 1s2 ¡ Co1NH3 2 5Cl2 1aq2  2Cl 1aq2
H2O

956

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

TABLE 21.12

Typical Coordination Numbers for Some Common Metal Ions

M

Coordination
Numbers

Cu
Ag
Au

2, 4
2
2, 4

M2

Coordination
Numbers

Mn2
Fe2
Co2
Ni2
Cu2
Zn2

4, 6
6
4, 6
4, 6
4, 6
4, 6

M3

Coordination
Numbers

Sc3
Cr3
Co3

6
6
6

Au3

4

Coordination compounds have been known since about 1700, but their true nature
was not understood until the 1890s when a young Swiss chemist named Alfred Werner
(1866–1919) proposed that transition metal ions have two types of valence (combining ability). One type of valence, which Werner called the secondary valence, refers
to the ability of a metal ion to bind to Lewis bases (ligands) to form complex ions.
The other type, the primary valence, refers to the ability of the metal ion to form ionic
bonds with oppositely charged ions. Thus Werner explained that the compound, originally written as CoCl3  5NH3, was really [Co(NH3)5Cl]Cl2, where the Co3 ion has
a primary valence of 3, satisﬁed by the three Cl ions, and a secondary valence of 6,
satisﬁed by the six ligands (ﬁve NH3 and one Cl). We now call the primary valence
the oxidation state and the secondary valence the coordination number, which reﬂects the number of bonds formed between the metal ion and the ligands in the complex ion.

Coordination
number

Geometry

2
Linear

4

Tetrahedral

Square planar

6

Octahedral

FIGURE 21.5
The ligand arrangements for coordination
numbers 2, 4, and 6.

Coordination Number
The number of bonds formed by metal ions to ligands in complex ions varies from two
to eight depending on the size, charge, and electron conﬁguration of the transition metal
ion. As shown in Table 21.12, 6 is the most common coordination number, followed
closely by 4, with a few metal ions showing a coordination number of 2. Many metal
ions show more than one coordination number, and there is really no simple way to
predict what the coordination number will be in a particular case. The typical geometries for the various common coordination numbers are shown in Fig. 21.5. Note that
six ligands produce an octahedral arrangement around the metal ion. Four ligands can
form either a tetrahedral or a square planar arrangement, and two ligands give a linear
structure.

Ligands
A ligand is a neutral molecule or ion having a lone electron pair that can be used to form
a bond to a metal ion. The formation of a metal–ligand bond therefore can be described
as the interaction between a Lewis base (the ligand) and a Lewis acid (the metal ion). The
resulting bond is often called a coordinate covalent bond.
A ligand that can form one bond to a metal ion is called a monodentate ligand, or
a unidentate ligand (from root words meaning “one tooth”). Examples of unidentate ligands are shown in Table 21.13.
Some ligands have more than one atom with a lone electron pair that can be used to
bond to a metal ion. Such ligands are said to be chelating ligands, or chelates (from the

Mn+

TABLE 21.13

N

Type

N

H

H
H

Unidentate/monodentate

H

H

C

C

H

H

Some Common Ligands
Examples
H2O
NH3

CN
NO2 (nitrite)

Bidentate

Oxalate
O
O

H

X (halides)

Ethylenediamine
(en)
H2 C

C

C

(a)

SCN (thiocyanate)
OH

() O

O ()

CH2

H2N

NH2
M

M
Mn+

Polydentate
N
H

H2 N

H

H

Diethylenetriamine
(dien)
(CH2)2 NH (CH2)2
Three coordinating atoms

Ethylenediaminetetraacetate
(EDTA)

(b)

FIGURE 21.6
(a) The bidentate ligand ethylenediamine
can bond to the metal ion through the
lone pair on each nitrogen atom, thus
forming two coordinate covalent bonds.
(b) Ammonia is a monodentate ligand.

O

O

() O

C

H2C

() O

C

H2C

N

(CH2)2

CH2

C

O ()

CH2

C

O ()

N

O

O
Six coordinating atoms

2

O

B

C
CH2

O

H2
C

O B

O
C

O

N
M

O

N

B

O

CH2
CH2

CH2

O

O

O

C

NH2

CH2

C

B

O
FIGURE 21.7
The coordination of EDTA with a 2
metal ion.

TABLE 21.14 Names of Some
Common Unidentate Ligands
Neutral Molecules
Aqua
Ammine
Methylamine
Carbonyl
Nitrosyl

H2O
NH3
CH3NH2
CO
NO
Anions

Fluoro
Chloro
Bromo
Iodo
Hydroxo
Cyano

F
Cl
Br
I
OH
CN

TABLE 21.15 Latin Names Used
for Some Metal Ions in Anionic
Complex Ions
Metal

Name in an
Anionic Complex

Iron
Copper
Lead
Silver
Gold
Tin

Ferrate
Cuprate
Plumbate
Argentate
Aurate
Stannate

Sample Exercise 21.1

*In an older system the negatively charged ligands were named ﬁrst, then neutral ligands, with positively
charged ligands named last. We will follow the newer convention in this text.

21.3

Coordination Compounds

959

disregarding the preﬁx. Since the counterions are chloride ions, the compound is named
as a chloride salt:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

Pentaamminechlorocobalt(III) chloride
Cation

Anion

b. First, we determine the oxidation state of the iron by considering the other charged
species. The compound contains three K ions and six CN ions. Therefore, the iron
must carry a charge of 3, giving a total of six positive charges to balance the six
negative charges. The complex ion present is thus Fe(CN)63. The cyanide ligands are
each designated cyano, and the preﬁx hexa- indicates that six are present. Since the
complex ion is an anion, we use the Latin name ferrate. The oxidation state is indicated
by (III) at the end of the name. The anion name is therefore hexacyanoferrate(III). The
cations are K ions, which are simply named potassium. Putting this together gives
the name
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Potassium hexacyanoferrate(III)
Cation

(top) An aqueous solution of
[Co(NH3)5Cl]Cl2. (bottom) Solid K3Fe(CN)6.

Anion

(The common name of this compound is potassium ferricyanide.)
c. We ﬁrst determine the oxidation state of the iron by looking at the other charged species:
four NO2 ions and one SO42 ion. The ethylenediamine is neutral. Thus the two iron
ions must carry a total positive charge of 6 to balance the six negative charges. This
means that each iron has a 3 oxidation state and is designated as iron(III).
Since the name ethylenediamine already contains di, we use bis- instead of di- to
indicate the two en ligands. The name for NO2 as a ligand is nitro, and the preﬁx diindicates the presence of two NO2 ligands. Since the anion is sulfate, the compound’s
name is
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎧
⎨
⎩

Bis1ethylenediamine2dinitroiron1III2 sulfate
Cation

Anion

Because the complex ion is a cation, the Latin name for iron is not used.
See Exercises 21.29 through 21.32.

Sample Exercise 21.2

Naming Coordination Compounds II
Given the following systematic names, give the formula of each coordination compound.
a. Triamminebromoplatinum(II) chloride
b. Potassium hexaﬂuorocobaltate(III)
Solution
a. Triammine signiﬁes three ammonia ligands, and bromo indicates one bromide ion as
a ligand. The oxidation state of platinum is 2, as indicated by the Roman numeral II.
Thus the complex ion is [Pt(NH3)3Br]. One chloride ion is needed to balance the 1
charge of this cation. The formula of the compound is [Pt(NH3)3Br]Cl. Note that
brackets enclose the complex ion.
b. The complex ion contains six ﬂuoride ligands attached to a Co3 ion to give CoF63.
Note that the -ate ending indicates that the complex ion is an anion. The cations are
K ions, and three are required to balance the 3 charge on the complex ion. Thus
the formula is K3[CoF6].
See Exercises 21.33 and 21.34.

960

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Alfred Werner: Coordination Chemist
uring the early and middle parts of the nineteenth century, chemists prepared a large number of colored compounds containing transition metals and other substances
such as ammonia, chloride ion, cyanide ion, and water. These
compounds were very interesting to chemists who were trying to understand the nature of bonding (Dalton’s atomic
theory of 1808 was very new at this time), and many theories were suggested to explain these substances. The most
widely accepted early theory was the chain theory, championed by Sophus Mads Jorgensen (1837–1914), professor of
chemistry at the University of Copenhagen. The chain theory
got its name from the postulate that metal ammine* complexes contain chains of NH3 molecules. For example,
Jorgensen proposed the structure

D

Co

NH3 CI
NH3 NH3
NH3 CI

NH3

NH3

CI

for the compound Co(NH3)6Cl3. In the late nineteenth century this theory was used in classrooms around the world to
explain the nature of metal–ammine compounds.
However, in 1890, a young Swiss chemist named Alfred Werner, who had just obtained a Ph.D. in the ﬁeld of
organic chemistry, became so interested in these compounds
that he apparently even dreamed about them. In the middle
of one night Werner awoke realizing that he had the correct
*Ammine is the name for NH3 as a ligand.

21.4

explanation for the constitution of these compounds. Writing furiously the rest of that night and into the late afternoon of the following day, he constructed a scientiﬁc paper
containing his now famous coordination theory. This model
postulates an octahedral arrangement of ligands around
the Co3 ion, producing the Co(NH3)63 complex ion with
three Cl ions as counterions. Thus Werner’s picture of
Co(NH3)6Cl3 varied greatly from the chain theory.
In his paper on the coordination theory, Werner explained not only the metal–ammine compounds but also
most of the other known transition metal compounds, and
the importance of his contribution was recognized immediately. He was appointed professor at the University of
Zurich, where he spent the rest of his life studying coordination compounds and reﬁning his theory. Alfred Werner
was a conﬁdent, impulsive man of seemingly boundless energy, who was known for his inspiring lectures, his intolerance of incompetence (he once threw a chair at a student
who performed poorly on an oral exam), and his intuitive
scientiﬁc brilliance. For example, he was the ﬁrst to show
that stereochemistry is a general phenomenon, not one exhibited only by carbon, as was previously thought. He also
recognized and named many types of isomerism.
In 1913, for his work on coordination chemistry and
stereochemistry, Werner became the fourteenth Nobel Prize
winner in chemistry and the ﬁrst Swiss chemist to be so
honored. Werner’s work is even more remarkable when one
realizes that his ideas preceded by many years any real
understanding of the nature of covalent bonds.

Isomerism

When two or more species have the same formula but different properties, they are said
to be isomers. Although isomers contain exactly the same types and numbers of atoms,
the arrangements of the atoms differ, and this leads to different properties. We will consider two main types of isomerism: structural isomerism, where the isomers contain the
same atoms but one or more bonds differ, and stereoisomerism, where all the bonds in
the isomers are the same but the spatial arrangements of the atoms are different. Each of
these classes also has subclasses (see Fig. 21.8), which we will now consider.

Structural Isomerism
The ﬁrst type of structural isomerism we will consider is coordination isomerism, in
which the composition of the complex ion varies. For example, [Cr(NH3)5SO4]Br and
[Cr(NH3)5Br]SO4 are coordination isomers. In the ﬁrst case, SO42 is coordinated to Cr3,
and Br is the counterion; in the second case, the roles of these ions are reversed.

21.4

Isomerism

961

Isomers
(same formula but different properties)

Structural
isomers
(different bonds)

Coordination
isomerism

Stereoisomers
(same bonds, different
spatial arrangements)

Linkage
isomerism

Geometric
(cis-trans)
isomerism

Optical
isomerism

O
N

FIGURE 21.8
Some classes of isomers.

O
Co

Another example of coordination isomerism is the [Co(en)3][Cr(ox)3] and [Cr(en)3]
[Co(ox)3] pair, where ox represents the oxalate ion, a bidentate ligand shown in Table 21.13.
In a second type of structural isomerism, linkage isomerism, the composition of the
complex ion is the same, but the point of attachment of at least one of the ligands differs.
Two ligands that can attach to metal ions in different ways are thiocyanate (SCN), which
can bond through lone electron pairs on the nitrogen or the sulfur atom, and the nitrite
ion (NO2), which can bond through lone electron pairs on the nitrogen or the oxygen
atom. For example, the following two compounds are linkage isomers:

(a)

O

N
O

3Co1NH3 2 4 1NO2 2Cl4Cl

Co

Tetraamminechloronitrocobalt(III) chloride
(yellow)

3Co1NH3 2 4 1ONO2Cl4Cl

(b)

FIGURE 21.9
As a ligand, NO2 can bond to a metal ion
(a) through a lone pair on the nitrogen
atom or (b) through a lone pair on one of
the oxygen atoms.
H3N

Cl
Pt

H3N

Cl

(a)

Cl

NH3
Pt

H3N

Cl

(b)

FIGURE 21.10
(a) The cis isomer of Pt(NH3)2Cl2 (yellow).
(b) The trans isomer of Pt(NH3)2Cl2 (pale
yellow).

Tetraamminechloronitritocobalt(III) chloride
(red)

In the ﬁrst case, the NO2 ligand is called nitro and is attached to Co3 through the nitrogen atom; in the second case, the NO2 ligand is called nitrito and is attached to Co3
through an oxygen atom (see Fig. 21.9).

Stereoisomerism
Stereoisomers have the same bonds but different spatial arrangements of the atoms. One
type, geometrical isomerism, or cis–trans isomerism, occurs when atoms or groups of
atoms can assume different positions around a rigid ring or bond. An important example
is the compound Pt(NH3)2Cl2, which has a square planar structure. The two possible
arrangements of the ligands are shown in Fig. 21.10. In the trans isomer, the ammonia
molecules are across (trans) from each other. In the cis isomer, the ammonia molecules
are next (cis) to each other.
Geometrical isomerism also occurs in octahedral complex ions. For example, the compound [Co(NH3)4Cl2]Cl has cis and trans isomers (Fig. 21.11).
A second type of stereoisomerism is called optical isomerism because the isomers
have opposite effects on plane-polarized light. When light is emitted from a source such
as a glowing ﬁlament, the oscillating electric ﬁelds of the photons in the beam are oriented randomly, as shown in Fig. 21.12. If this light is passed through a polarizer, only
the photons with electric ﬁelds oscillating in a single plane remain, constituting planepolarized light.
In 1815, a French physicist, Jean Biot (1774–1862), showed that certain crystals could
rotate the plane of polarization of light. Later it was found that solutions of certain

962

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
Cl

Cl
H3N

H3N

NH3

Co

Co
H3 N

NH3

H3 N

Cl
NH3

Cl

FIGURE 21.11
(a) The trans isomer of [Co(NH3)4Cl2].
The chloride ligands are directly across
from each other. (b) The cis isomer of
[Co(NH3)4Cl2]. The chloride ligands in this
case share an edge of the octahedron. Because of their different structures, the trans
isomer of [Co(NH3)4Cl2]Cl is green and the
cis isomer is violet.

NH3

Cl

Cl

Co

Co
Cl

Cl

Light
source
Polarizing
filter

FIGURE 21.12
Unpolarized light consists of waves vibrating in many different planes (indicated by
the arrows). The polarizing ﬁlter blocks all
waves except those vibrating in a given
plane.

Unpolarized
light

Plane
polarized
light

Polarizing
filter
Tube
containing
sample

Unpolarized
light

θ
Polarized
light

Rotated
polarized light

FIGURE 21.13
The rotation of the plane of polarized light by an optically active substance. The angle of rotation is called theta (u).

compounds could do the same thing (see Fig. 21.13). Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was the
ﬁrst to understand this behavior. In 1848 he noted that solid sodium ammonium tartrate
(NaNH4C4H4O4) existed as a mixture of two types of crystals, which he painstakingly
separated with tweezers. Separate solutions of these two types of crystals rotated planepolarized light in exactly opposite directions. This led to a connection between optical
activity and molecular structure.

21.4

Isomerism

963

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Importance of Being cis
ome of the most important advancements of science are
the results of accidental discoveries—for example, penicillin, Teﬂon, and the sugar substitutes cyclamate and aspartame. Another important chance discovery occurred in 1964,
when a group of scientists using platinum electrodes to apply an electric ﬁeld to a colony of E. coli bacteria noticed
that the bacteria failed to divide but continued to grow, forming long ﬁbrous cells. Further study revealed that cell division was inhibited by small concentrations of cis-Pt(NH3)2Cl2
and cis-Pt(NH3)2Cl4 formed electrolytically in the solution.
Cancerous cells multiply very rapidly because cell
division is uncontrolled. Thus these and similar platinum
complexes were evaluated as antitumor agents, which inhibit the division of cancer cells. The results showed that

S

cis-Pt(NH3)2Cl2 was active against a wide variety of tumors,
including testicular and ovarian tumors, which are very resistant to treatment by more traditional methods. However,
although the cis complex showed signiﬁcant antitumor
activity, the corresponding trans complex had no effect on
tumors. This shows the importance of isomerism in biologic
systems. When drugs are synthesized, great care must be
taken to obtain the correct isomer.
Although cis-Pt(NH3)2Cl2 has proven to be a valuable
drug, unfortunately it has some troublesome side effects, the
most serious being kidney damage. As a result, the search
continues for even more effective antitumor agents. Promising candidates are shown in Fig. 21.14. Note that they are
all cis complexes.

FIGURE 21.14
Some cis complexes of platinum and palladium that show signiﬁcant antitumor activity. It is thought that the cis
complexes work by losing two adjacent ligands and forming coordinate covalent bonds to adjacent bases on a
DNA molecule.

We now realize that optical activity is exhibited by molecules that have nonsuperimposable mirror images. Your hands are nonsuperimposable mirror images (Fig. 21.15).
The two hands are related like an object and its mirror image; one hand cannot be turned
to make it identical to the other. Many molecules show this same feature, such as the

Left
hand

Right
hand

Mirror image
of right hand

FIGURE 21.15
A human hand exhibits a nonsuperimposable mirror image. Note that the mirror image of the right hand (while identical to
the left hand) cannot be turned in any way to make it identical to (superimposable on) the actual right hand.

964

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

N
N

N

Mirror image
of Isomer I

Co
N

N

N
N

FIGURE 21.16
Isomers I and II of Co(en)33 are mirror images (the image of I is identical to II) that
cannot be superimposed. That is, there is
no way that I can be turned in space so
that it is the same as II.

N

N
N

N

Co

N
Co

N

N

N

N

N

N

Isomer I

Isomer II

complex ion [Co(en)3]3 shown in Fig. 21.16. Objects that have nonsuperimposable mirror images are said to be chiral (from the Greek word cheir, meaning “hand”).
The isomers of [Co(en)3]3 (Fig. 21.17) are nonsuperimposable mirror images called
enantiomers, which rotate plane-polarized light in opposite directions and are thus optical
isomers. The isomer that rotates the plane of light to the right (when viewed down the
beam of oncoming light) is said to be dextrorotatory, designated by d. The isomer that
rotates the plane of light to the left is levorotatory (l). An equal mixture of the d and

Cl
N

N
Co

N

N

N

N

N

Cl

Cl
N

N

cis

Co

Cl

Cl

N
Cl
N

N

N

Isomer I
(a)

N
Co

Cl

Co

Isomer II cannot be
superimposed exactly
on isomer I. They are
not identical structures.

Cl

N
Cl

trans

The trans isomer and
its mirror image are
identical. They are not
isomers of each other.

N
Co
N

N Isomer II has the same
structure as the mirror
Cl image of isomer I.

Isomer II
N

N

(b)

FIGURE 21.17
(a) The trans isomer of Co(en)2Cl2 and its mirror image are identical (superimposable). (b) The cis isomer of Co(en)2Cl2 and its mirror image
are not superimposable and are thus a pair of optical isomers.

21.5

Bonding in Complex Ions: The Localized Electron Model

965

l forms in solution, called a racemic mixture, does not rotate the plane of the polarized
light at all because the two opposite effects cancel each other.
Geometrical isomers are not necessarily optical isomers. For instance, the trans isomer
of [Co(en)2Cl2] shown in Fig. 21.17 is identical to its mirror image. Since this isomer is
superimposable on its mirror image, it does not exhibit optical isomerism and is not chiral.
On the other hand, cis-[Co(en)2Cl2] is not superimposable on its mirror image; a pair of
enantiomers exists for this complex ion (the cis isomer is chiral).
Most important biomolecules are chiral, and their reactions are highly structure dependent. For example, a drug can have a particular effect because its molecules can bind
to chiral molecules in the body. To bind correctly, however, the correct optical isomer of
the drug must be administered. Just as the right hand of one person requires the right hand
of another to perform a handshake, a given isomer in the body requires a speciﬁc isomer
of the drug to bind together. Because of this, the syntheses of drugs, which are usually
very complicated molecules, must be carried out in a way that produces the correct
“handedness,” a requirement that greatly adds to the synthetic difﬁculties.
Sample Exercise 21.3

Geometrical and Optical Isomerism
Does the complex ion [Co(NH3)Br(en)2]2 exhibit geometrical isomerism? Does it exhibit
optical isomerism?
Solution
The complex ion exhibits geometrical isomerism because the ethylenediamine ligands can
be across from or next to each other:

The cis isomer of the complex ion also exhibits optical isomerism because its mirror
images

cannot be turned in any way to make them superimposable. Thus these mirror-image isomers of the cis complex are shown to be enantiomers that will rotate plane-polarized light
in opposite directions.
See Exercises 21.41 and 21.42.

21.5

Bonding in Complex Ions: The Localized
Electron Model

In Chapters 8 and 9 we considered the localized electron model, a very useful model for
describing the bonding in molecules. Recall that a central feature of this model is the
formation of hybrid atomic orbitals that are used to share electron pairs to form s bonds

966

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

H

H

H

N

H
H
H N
H
N

H
H

Co
H
H N
H
N
H

FIGURE 21.18
A set of six d 2sp3 hybrid orbitals on Co3
can accept an electron pair from each of six
NH3 ligands to form the Co(NH3)63 ion.

H
H

N
H

H

H

between atoms. This same model can be used to account for the bonding in complex ions,
but there are two important points to keep in mind:
1. The VSEPR model for predicting structure generally does not work for complex ions.
However, we can safely assume that a complex ion with a coordination number of 6
will have an octahedral arrangement of ligands, and complexes with two ligands will
be linear. On the other hand, complex ions with a coordination number of 4 can be
either tetrahedral or square planar, and there is no completely reliable way to predict
which will occur in a particular case.
2. The interaction between a metal ion and a ligand can be viewed as a Lewis acid–base
reaction with the ligand donating a lone pair of electrons to an empty orbital of the
metal ion to form a coordinate covalent bond:

The hybrid orbitals used by the metal ion depend on the number and arrangement of
the ligands. For example, accommodating the lone pairs from the six ammonia molecules in the octahedral Co(NH3)63 ion requires a set of six empty hybrid atomic orbitals in an octahedral arrangement. As we discussed in Section 9.1, an octahedral set
of orbitals is formed by the hybridization of two d, one s, and three p orbitals to give
a set of six d 2sp3 orbitals (see Fig. 21.18).
The hybrid orbitals required on a metal ion in a four-coordinate complex depend on
whether the structure is tetrahedral or square planar. For a tetrahedral arrangement of ligands, an sp3 hybrid set is required (see Fig. 21.19). For example, in the tetrahedral CoCl42
ion, the Co2 can be described as sp3 hybridized. A square planar arrangement of ligands
requires a dsp2 hybrid orbital set on the metal ion (see Fig. 21.19). For example, in the
square planar Ni(CN) 42 ion, the Ni2 is described as dsp2 hybridized.

21.6

The Crystal Field Model

967

A linear complex requires two hybrid orbitals 180 degrees from each other. This
arrangement is given by an sp hybrid set (see Fig. 21.19). Thus, in the linear Ag(NH3)2
ion, the Ag can be described as sp hybridized.
Although the localized electron model can account in a general way for metal–ligand
bonds, it is rarely used today because it cannot readily account for important properties of
complex ions, such as magnetism and color. Thus we will not pursue the model any further.

M

21.6
Tetrahedral ligand
arrangement; sp3
hybridization

M

Square planar
ligand arrangement;
dsp2 hybridization

M
Linear ligand
arrangement; sp
hybridization

FIGURE 21.19
The hybrid orbitals required for tetrahedral,
square planar, and linear complex ions.
The metal ion hybrid orbitals are empty,
and the metal ion bonds to the ligands by
accepting lone pairs.

The Crystal Field Model

The main reason the localized electron model cannot fully account for the properties of
complex ions is that it gives no information about how the energies of the d orbitals are
affected by complex ion formation. This is critical because, as we will see, the color and
magnetism of complex ions result from changes in the energies of the metal ion d orbitals
caused by the metal–ligand interactions.
The crystal ﬁeld model focuses on the energies of the d orbitals. In fact, this model
is not so much a bonding model as it is an attempt to account for the colors and magnetic
properties of complex ions. In its simplest form, the crystal ﬁeld model assumes that the
ligands can be approximated by negative point charges and that metal–ligand bonding is
entirely ionic.

Octahedral Complexes
We will illustrate the fundamental principles of the crystal ﬁeld model by applying it to
an octahedral complex. Figure 21.20 shows the orientation of the 3d orbitals relative to an
octahedral arrangement of point-charge ligands. The important thing to note is that two
of the orbitals, dz2 and dx2  y 2, point their lobes directly at the point-charge ligands and
three of the orbitals, dxz, dyz, and dxy, point their lobes between the point charges.
To understand the effect of this difference, we need to consider which type of orbital
is lower in energy. Because the negative point-charge ligands repel negatively charged
electrons, the electrons will ﬁrst ﬁll the d orbitals farthest from the ligands to minimize
repulsions. In other words, the dxz, dyz, and dxy orbitals (known as the t2g set) are at a lower
–

z
–
–

x

y

–

–

–

FIGURE 21.20
An octahedral arrangement of point-charge
ligands and the orientation of the 3d
orbitals.

dxy

dz2

dx2 – y2

dyz

dxz

968

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

eg(dz2, dx2 – y2)
∆
E

t2g (dxz, dyz, dxy)

Free metal ion
3d orbital
energies

FIGURE 21.21
The energies of the 3d orbitals for a metal
ion in an octahedral complex. The 3d orbitals are degenerate (all have the same
energy) in the free metal ion. In the octahedral complex the orbitals are split into
two sets as shown. The difference in energy
between the two sets is designated as ¢
(delta).

Sample Exercise 21.4

energy in the octahedral complex than are the dz2 and dx2  y2 orbitals (the eg set). This is
shown in Fig. 21.21. The negative point-charge ligands increase the energies of all the d
orbitals. However, the orbitals that point at the ligands are raised in energy more than
those that point between the ligands.
It is this splitting of the 3d orbital energies (symbolized by ¢ ) that explains the
color and magnetism of complex ions of the ﬁrst-row transition metal ions. For example,
in an octahedral complex of Co3 (a metal ion with six 3d electrons), there are two possible ways to place the electrons in the split 3d orbitals (Fig. 21.22). If the splitting produced by the ligands is very large, a situation called the strong-ﬁeld case, the electrons
will pair in the lower-energy t2g orbitals. This gives a diamagnetic complex in which all
the electrons are paired. On the other hand, if the splitting is small (the weak-ﬁeld case),
the electrons will occupy all ﬁve orbitals before pairing occurs. In this case the complex
has four unpaired electrons and is paramagnetic.
The crystal ﬁeld model allows us to account for the differences in the magnetic properties of Co(NH3)63 and CoF63. The Co(NH3)63 ion is known to be diamagnetic and
thus corresponds to the strong-ﬁeld case, also called the low-spin case, since it yields the
minimum number of unpaired electrons. In contrast, the CoF63 ion, which is known to have
four unpaired electrons, corresponds to the weak-ﬁeld case, also known as the high-spin
case, since it gives the maximum number of unpaired electrons.

Crystal Field Model I
The Fe(CN) 63 ion is known to have one unpaired electron. Does the CN ligand produce
a strong or weak ﬁeld?
Solution
Since the ligand is CN and the overall complex ion charge is 3, the metal ion must be
Fe3, which has a 3d5 electron conﬁguration. The two possible arrangements of the ﬁve
electrons in the d orbitals split by the octahedrally arranged ligands are

eg

eg
Large

E
Large

E

t2g

eg

E

Small

t2g

The strong-ﬁeld case gives one unpaired electron, which agrees with the experimental
observation. The CN ion is a strong-ﬁeld ligand toward the Fe3 ion.

t2g
Strong field
(a)

See Exercises 21.45 and 21.46.

eg
Small

E

From studies of many octahedral complexes, we can arrange ligands in order of their
ability to produce d-orbital splitting. A partial listing of ligands in this spectrochemical
series is
CN 7 NO2 7 en 7 NH3 7 H2O 7 OH 7 F 7 Cl 7 Br 7 I

t2g
Weak field
(b)

FIGURE 21.22
Possible electron arrangements in the split
3d orbitals in an octahedral complex of
Co3 (electron conﬁguration 3d 6). (a) In a
strong ﬁeld (large ¢ value), the electrons
ﬁll the t2 g set ﬁrst, giving a diamagnetic
complex. (b) In a weak ﬁeld (small ¢
value), the electrons occupy all ﬁve orbitals
before any pairing occurs.

Strong-ﬁeld
ligands
(large )

Weak-ﬁeld
ligands
(small )

The ligands are arranged in order of decreasing ¢ values toward a given metal ion.
It also has been observed that the magnitude of ¢ for a given ligand increases as the
charge on the metal ion increases. For example, NH3 is a weak-ﬁeld ligand toward Co2
but acts as a strong-ﬁeld ligand toward Co3. This makes sense; as the metal ion charge
increases, the ligands will be drawn closer to the metal ion because of the increased charge
density. As the ligands move closer, they cause greater splitting of the d orbitals and
produce a larger ¢ value.

FIGURE 21.23
The visible spectrum.

400

Sample Exercise 21.5

500
600
Wavelength (nm)

The Crystal Field Model

969

Red

Orange

Yellow

Green

Blue

Violet

21.6

700

Crystal Field Model II
Predict the number of unpaired electrons in the complex ion [Cr(CN) 6 ] 4.
Solution
The net charge of 4 means that the metal ion present must be Cr2 (6  2  4),
which has a 3d 4 electron conﬁguration. Since CN is a strong-ﬁeld ligand (see the spectrochemical series), the correct crystal ﬁeld diagram for [Cr(CN) 6 ] 4 is
eg
Large

E
t2g

The complex ion will have two unpaired electrons. Note that the CN ligand produces
such a large splitting that all four electrons will occupy the t2g set even though two of the
electrons must be paired in the same orbital.
See Exercises 21.47 and 21.48.

Filter absorbs
yellow-green
light

(a)

We have seen how the crystal ﬁeld model can account for the magnetic properties of
octahedral complexes. The same model also can explain the colors of these complex ions.
For example, Ti(H2O)63, an octahedral complex of Ti3, which has a 3d 1 electron conﬁguration, is violet because it absorbs light in the middle of the visible region of the
spectrum (see Fig. 21.23). When a substance absorbs certain wavelengths of light in the
visible region, the color of the substance is determined by the wavelengths of visible light
that remain. We say that the substance exhibits the color complementary to those absorbed.
The Ti(H2O)63 ion is violet because it absorbs light in the yellow-green region, thus letting
red light and blue light pass, which gives the observed violet color. This is shown schematically in Fig. 21.24. Table 21.16 shows the general relationship between the wavelengths
of visible light absorbed and the approximate color observed.
TABLE 21.16 Approximate Relationship of
Wavelength of Visible Light Absorbed to
Color Observed

Ti(H2O)63+

(b)

FIGURE 21.24
(a) When white light shines on a ﬁlter that
absorbs in the yellow-green region, the
emerging light is violet. (b) Because the
complex ion Ti(H2O)63 absorbs yellowgreen light, a solution of it is violet.

Absorbed Wavelength
in nm (Color)

Observed Color

400
450
490
570
580
600
650

Greenish yellow
Yellow
Red
Violet
Dark blue
Blue
Green

(violet)
(blue)
(blue-green)
(yellow-green)
(yellow)
(orange)
(red)

970

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Transition Metal Ions Lend Color to Gems
he beautiful pure color of gems, so valued by cultures
everywhere, arises from trace transition metal ion impurities in minerals that would otherwise be colorless. For
example, the stunning red of a ruby, the most valuable of all
gemstones, is caused by Cr3 ions, which replace about 1%
of the Al3 ions in the mineral corundum, which is a form
of aluminum oxide (Al2O3) that is nearly as hard as diamond. In the corundum structure the Cr3 ions are surrounded by six oxide ions at the vertices of an octahedron.
This leads to the characteristic octahedral splitting of
chromium’s 3d orbitals, such that the Cr3 ions absorb
strongly in the blue-violet and yellow-green regions of the
visible spectrum but transmit red light to give the characteristic ruby color. (On the other hand, if some of the Al3
ions in corundum are replaced by a mixture of Fe2, Fe3,

T

and Ti4 ions, the gem is a sapphire with its brilliant blue
color; or if some of the Al3 ions are replaced by Fe3 ions,
the stone is a yellow topaz.)
Emeralds are derived from the mineral beryl, a beryllium
aluminum silicate (empirical formula 3BeO  Al2O3  6SiO2).
When some of the Al3 ions in beryl are replaced by Cr3 ions,
the characteristic green color of emerald results. In this environment the splitting of the Cr3 3d orbitals causes it to strongly
absorb yellow and blue-violet light and to transmit green light.
A gem closely related to ruby and emerald is alexandrite, named after Alexander II of Russia. This gem is based
on the mineral chrysoberyl, a beryllium aluminate with the
empirical formula BeO  Al2O3 in which approximately 1%
of the Al3 ions are replaced by Cr3 ions. In the chrysoberyl
environment Cr3 absorbs strongly in the yellow region of

The reason that the Ti(H2O)63 ion absorbs a speciﬁc wavelength of visible light can
be traced to the transfer of the lone d electron between the split d orbitals, as shown in
Fig. 21.25. A given photon of light can be absorbed by a molecule only if the wavelength
of the light provides exactly the energy needed by the molecule. In other words, the wavelength absorbed is determined by the relationship
¢E 

TABLE 21.17 Several
Octahedral Complexes of Cr3
and Their Colors
Isomer

Color

[Cr(H2O)6]Cl3
[Cr(H2O)5Cl]Cl2
[Cr(H2O)4Cl2]Cl
[Cr(NH3)6]Cl3
[Cr(NH3)5Cl]Cl2
[Cr(NH3)4Cl2]Cl

Violet
Blue-green
Green
Yellow
Purple
Violet

FIGURE 21.25
The complex ion Ti(H2O)63 can absorb
visible light in the yellow-green region to
transfer the lone d electron from the t2 g to
the eg set.

hc
l

where ¢E represents the energy spacing in the molecule (we have used simply ¢ in this
chapter) and l represents the wavelength of light needed. Because the d-orbital splitting
in most octahedral complexes corresponds to the energies of photons in the visible region,
octahedral complex ions are usually colored.
Since the ligands coordinated to a given metal ion determine the size of the d-orbital
splitting, the color changes as the ligands are changed. This occurs because a change in ¢
means a change in the wavelength of light needed to transfer electrons between the t2g and
eg orbitals. Several octahedral complexes of Cr3 and their colors are listed in Table 21.17.

Other Coordination Geometries
Using the same principles developed for octahedral complexes, we will now consider complexes with other geometries. For example, Fig. 21.26 shows a tetrahedral arrangement of

21.6

the spectrum. Alexandrite has the interesting property of
changing colors depending on the light source. When the
ﬁrst alexandrite stone was discovered deep in a mine in the
Russian Ural Mountains in 1831, it appeared to be a deep
red color in the ﬁrelight of the miners’ lamps. However,
when the stone was brought to the surface, its color was
blue. This seemingly magical color change occurs because
the ﬁrelight of a miner’s helmet is rich in the yellow and red
wavelengths of the visible spectrum but does not contain
much blue. Absorption of the yellow by the stone produces
a reddish color. However, daylight has much more intensity
in the blue region than ﬁrelight. Thus the extra blue in the
light transmitted by the stone gives it bluish color in daylight.
Once the structure of a natural gem is known, it is usually
not very difﬁcult to make the gem artiﬁcially. For example, rubies and sapphires are made on a large scale by fusing Al(OH)3
with the appropriate transition metal salts at approximately
1200°C to make the “doped” corundum. With these techniques

The Crystal Field Model

971

Alexandrite, a gem closely related to ruby
and emerald.

gems of astonishing size can be manufactured: Rubies as large
as 10 lb and sapphires up to 100 lb have been synthesized.
Smaller synthetic stones produced for jewelry are virtually
identical to the corresponding natural stones, and it takes great
skill for a gemologist to tell the difference.

point charges in relation to the 3d orbitals of a metal ion. There are two important facts
to note:
1. None of the 3d orbitals “point at the ligands” in the tetrahedral arrangement, as the
dx 2  y 2 and dz 2 orbitals do in the octahedral case. Thus the tetrahedrally arranged ligands do not differentiate the d orbitals as much in the tetrahedral case as in the
octahedral case. That is, the difference in energy between the split d orbitals will be signiﬁcantly less in tetrahedral complexes. Although we will not derive it here, the tetrahedral splitting is 94 that of the octahedral splitting for a given ligand and metal ion:
¢ tet  49 ¢ oct
2. Although not exactly pointing at the ligands, the dxy, dxz, and dyz orbitals are closer to
the point charges than are the dz2 and dx2  y2 orbitals. This means that the tetrahedral
d-orbital splitting will be opposite to that for the octahedral arrangement. The two
arrangements are contrasted in Fig. 21.27. Because the d-orbital splitting is relatively
small for the tetrahedral case, the weak-ﬁeld case (high-spin case) always applies.
There are no known ligands powerful enough to produce the strong-ﬁeld case in a
tetrahedral complex.
Solutions of [Cr(NH3)6]Cl3 (yellow) and
[Cr(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 (purple).

FIGURE 21.26
(a) Tetrahedral and octahedral arrangements of ligands shown inscribed in cubes.
Note that in the two types of arrangements,
the point charges occupy opposite parts of
the cube; the octahedral point charges are
at the centers of the cube faces, and the
tetrahedral point charges occupy opposite
corners of the cube. (b) The orientations of
the 3d orbitals relative to the tetrahedral
set of point charges.

–
–
–
–

dz2

–
– – –
–
–

dx2 – y2

(a)
dxy
(b)

dxz

dyz

972

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

FIGURE 21.27
The crystal ﬁeld diagrams for octahedral
and tetrahedral complexes. The relative energies of the sets of d orbitals are reversed.
For a given type of ligand, the splitting is
much larger for the octahedral complex
( ¢ oct 7 ¢ tet) because in this arrangement
the dz 2 and dx2 y2 orbitals point their lobes
directly at the point charges and are thus
relatively high in energy.

Sample Exercise 21.6

Crystal Field Model III
Give the crystal ﬁeld diagram for the tetrahedral complex ion CoCl42.
Solution
The complex ion contains Co2, which has a 3d 7 electron conﬁguration. The splitting of
the d orbitals will be small, since this is a tetrahedral complex, giving the high-spin case
with three unpaired electrons.
dxy

E

dxz

dz 2

dyz

Small

dx 2y 2
See Exercises 21.53 through 21.56.

The crystal ﬁeld model also applies to square planar and linear complexes. The crystal ﬁeld diagrams for these cases are shown in Fig. 21.28. The ranking of orbitals in these
diagrams can be explained by considering the relative orientations of the point charges and
the orbitals. The diagram in Fig. 21.27 for the octahedral arrangement can be used to obtain these orientations. We can obtain the square planar complex by removing the two point
charges along the z axis. This will greatly lower the energy of dz 2, leaving only dx2  y2,

dx 2 – y 2

E

dz 2

dxy
dz2

FIGURE 21.28
(a) The crystal ﬁeld diagram for a square
planar complex oriented in the xy plane
with ligands along the x and y axes. The
position of the dz2 orbital is higher than
those of the dxz and dyz orbitals because of
the “doughnut” of electron density in the
xy plane. The actual position of dz2 is somewhat uncertain and varies in different
square planar complexes. (b) The crystal
ﬁeld diagram for a linear complex where
the ligands lie along the z axis.

dxz
Free metal ion

dyz

E
dxz

dyz

dxy

dx 2 – y 2

Complex
Free metal ion

Complex

x
M
M
y
(a)

(b)

z

21.7

The Biologic Importance of Coordination Complexes

973

which points at the four remaining ligands as the highest-energy orbital. We can obtain the
linear complex from the octahedral arrangement by leaving the two ligands along the z axis
and removing the four in the xy plane. This means that only the dz2 points at the ligands
and is highest in energy.

21.7

A protein is a large molecule assembled
from amino acids, which have the general structure in which R represents
various groups.
R
A
H2NO C O COOH
A
H

The Biologic Importance of
Coordination Complexes

The ability of metal ions to coordinate with and release ligands and to easily undergo oxidation and reduction makes them ideal for use in biologic systems. For example, metal
ion complexes are used in humans for the transport and storage of oxygen, as electrontransfer agents, as catalysts, and as drugs. Most of the ﬁrst-row transition metals are essential for human health, as summarized in Table 21.18. We will concentrate on iron’s
role in biologic systems, since several of its coordination complexes have been studied
extensively.
Iron plays a central role in almost all living cells. In mammals, the principal source
of energy comes from the oxidation of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. Although oxygen
is the oxidizing agent for these processes, it does not react directly with these molecules.
Instead, the electrons from the breakdown of these nutrients are passed along a complex
chain of molecules, called the respiratory chain, eventually reaching the O2 molecule. The
principal electron-transfer molecules in the respiratory chain are iron-containing species
called cytochromes, consisting of two main parts: an iron complex called heme and a
protein. The structure of the heme complex is shown in Fig. 21.29. Note that it contains
an iron ion (it can be either Fe2 or Fe3) coordinated to a rather complicated planar ligand
called a porphyrin. As a class, porphyrins all contain the same central ring structure but
have different substituent groups at the edges of the rings. The various porphyrin molecules
act as tetradentate ligands for many metal ions, including iron, cobalt, and magnesium. In fact,
chlorophyll, a substance essential to the process of photosynthesis, is a magnesium–porphyrin
complex of the type shown in Fig. 21.30.
In addition to participating in the transfer of electrons from nutrients to oxygen, iron
plays a principal role in the transport and storage of oxygen in mammalian blood and
tissues. Oxygen is stored in a molecule called myoglobin, which consists of a heme

TABLE 21.18
First-Row
Transition Metal
Scandium
Titanium
Vanadium
Chromium
Manganese
Iron
Cobalt
Nickel
Copper
Zinc

The First-Row Transition Metals and Their Biologic Signiﬁcance
Biologic Function(s)
None known.
None known.
None known in humans.
Assists insulin in the control of blood sugar; may also be
involved in the control of cholesterol.
Necessary for a number of enzymatic reactions.
Component of hemoglobin and myoglobin; involved in the
electron-transport chain.
Component of vitamin B12, which is essential for the metabolism
of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins.
Component of the enzymes urease and hydrogenase.
Component of several enzymes; assists in iron storage; involved
in the production of color pigments of hair, skin, and eyes.
Component of insulin and many enzymes.

974

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
CH3

CH

HC

CH
N

CH3
N
CH2
CH2
COOH

CH2

Fe

CH3
N
CH

N

CH2

CH

HC

CH2

CH3

CH2COOH

FIGURE 21.29
The heme complex, in which an Fe2 ion is
coordinated to four nitrogen atoms of a
planar porphyrin ligand.

complex and a protein in a structure very similar to that of the cytochromes. In myoglobin,
the Fe2 ion is coordinated to four nitrogen atoms of the porphyrin ring and to a nitrogen
atom of the protein chain, as shown in Fig. 21.31. Since Fe2 is normally six-coordinate,
this leaves one position open for attachment of an O2 molecule.
One especially interesting feature of myoglobin is that it involves an O2 molecule attaching directly to Fe2. However, if gaseous O2 is bubbled into an aqueous solution containing heme, the Fe2 is immediately oxidized to Fe3. This oxidation of the Fe2 in
heme does not happen in myoglobin. This fact is of crucial importance because Fe3 does

N
N

Mg
N

FIGURE 21.30
Chlorophyll is a porphyrin complex of Mg 2. There are two similar forms of chlorophyll, one of which is shown here.

N

21.7

The Biologic Importance of Coordination Complexes

975

CHEMICAL IMPACT
The Danger of Mercury*
n August 1989, four family members from Lincoln Park,
Michigan, died under mysterious circumstances. All four
victims had severe tissue damage to the esophagus and
lungs, which led doctors to suspect exposure to some type
of caustic chemical. Subsequently, local police and ﬁre investigators discovered a crude laboratory in the basement
that was used to recover valuable silver from stolen dental
amalgams. A dental amalgam is a metal alloy that a dentist
uses to ﬁll a tooth. The alloy typically contains silver, tin,
copper, and zinc dissolved in liquid mercury. The mixture
is placed in a cavity, where it hardens, resulting in a standard “ﬁlling.”
One of the victims worked at a manufacturing facility
for amalgams and was stealing some of the products. At
home in his crude lab he heated the amalgam to drive off
the mercury (which vaporized at relatively low temperatures)
so that he could recover the silver that was left behind. In
the process, the colorless, odorless, tasteless mercury vapor
entered the ductwork of the home, which was contaminated
with mercury at levels 1500 times normal—levels certain to
result in death to those exposed. In fact, postmortem analysis revealed extreme levels of mercury in the vital organs of
all four victims. Mercury vapor was the silent killer.
The toxicity of mercury varies signiﬁcantly depending
on the route of entry into the body. Inhalation is the most
dangerous route because mercury vapor entering the lungs
quickly passes across the lung–blood barrier and into the
bloodstream, where it can interfere with normal blood chemistry. One of the reactions that takes place in the blood is

I

the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide (a metabolic waste
product) by the enzyme peroxidase:
2H2O2

Peroxidase

¡ 2H2O  O2

When elemental mercury enters the bloodstream, it reacts
with hydrogen peroxide in the presence of peroxidase to produce mercury(II) oxide and water:
Hg  H2O2

Peroxidase

¡ HgO  H2O

If this conversion to mercury(II) occurs within vital tissues,
the mercury(II) cation can denature proteins, inhibit enzyme
activity, and disrupt cell membranes. Death often results
from respiratory or kidney failure.
If mercury is so toxic, how can it be used in dental ﬁllings? Surprisingly, unlike elemental mercury in the vapor
form, mercury bound as a solid in a dental amalgam presents little, if any, risk. Because the mercury is not mobile,
even in the harsh environment of the human mouth, the
American Dental Association has determined it to be a minimal health risk to dental patients. Even if a ﬁlling loosens
and is accidentally swallowed, it is passed through the digestive system and excreted before it can pose any risk. The
mercury that the four victims in this story were exposed to
resulted from heating the amalgam in a smelting furnace,
thus vaporizing the mercury and exposing the occupants of
the house to the most hazardous route of entry—inhalation.
*Printed with permission, ChemMatters magazine. Copyright © 1999,
American Chemical Society.

not form a coordinate covalent bond with O2, and myoglobin would not function if the
bound Fe2 could be oxidized. Since the Fe2 in the “bare” heme complex can be oxidized, it must be the protein that somehow prevents the oxidation. How? Based on much
research, the answer seems to be that the oxidation of Fe2 to Fe3 involves an oxygen
bridge between two iron ions (the circles indicate the ligands):

The bulky protein around the heme group in myoglobin prevents two molecules from getting close enough to form the oxygen bridge, and so oxidation of the Fe2 is prevented.
The transport of O2 in the blood is carried out by hemoglobin, a molecule consisting of four myoglobin-like units, as shown in Fig. 21.32. Each hemoglobin can therefore

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

976

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

CD
C
D
FG
W

HC
F

B

G
E
H

AB

FIGURE 21.31
A representation of the myoglobin molecule. The Fe2 ion is coordinated to four nitrogen atoms in the porphyrin of the heme
(represented by the disk in the ﬁgure) and
on nitrogen from the protein chain. This
leaves a sixth coordination position (indicated by the W) available for an oxygen
molecule.

EF

A
GH

NA

bind four O2 molecules to form a bright red diamagnetic complex. The diamagnetism
occurs because oxygen is a strong-ﬁeld ligand toward Fe2, which has a 3d 6 electron
conﬁguration. When the oxygen molecule is released, water molecules occupy the sixth
coordination position around each Fe2, giving a bluish paramagnetic complex (H2O is a
weak-ﬁeld ligand toward Fe2) that gives venous blood its characteristic bluish tint.

EF1

β2

EF

β1

F′
F1

H23

F

A

A′

E′

A9
H15
F8

H′

H
B1

E7

B

H9
G9

FG3

G

FG4

G3

G1

G′

G4

C3

B14

C

C6

CD5
E1

G19

E

B11

E1

G3
CD5 C5

C6

C

G1

C3

C7

G2

G

FG5

G19
G9

FG5

C2

F′

FG3

H9

D1

FIGURE 21.32
A representation of the hemoglobin structure. There are two slightly different types
of protein chains (␣ and ␤). Each hemoglobin has two ␣ chains and two ␤ chains,
each with a heme complex near the center.
Thus each hemoglobin molecule can complex with four O2 molecules.

E′

α2

A′

H′

H23

F

B

E7

B1

E

F8

H
A12

A

α1

A1
F1

EF
EF1

21.7

FIGURE 21.33
A normal red blood cell (right) and a sickle
cell (left), both magniﬁed 18,000 times.

The Biologic Importance of Coordination Complexes

977

Hemoglobin dramatically demonstrates how sensitive the function of a biomolecule
is to its structure. In certain people, in the synthesis of the proteins needed for hemoglobin, an improper amino acid is inserted into the protein in two places. This may not seem
very serious, since there are several hundred amino acids present. However, because the
incorrect amino acid has a nonpolar substituent instead of the polar one found on the
proper amino acid, the hemoglobin drastically changes its shape. The red blood cells are
then sickle-shaped rather than disk-shaped, as shown in Fig. 21.33. The misshapen cells
can aggregate, causing clogging of tiny capillaries. This condition, known as sickle cell
anemia, is the subject of intense research.
Our knowledge of the workings of hemoglobin allows us to understand the effects of
high altitudes on humans. The reaction between hemoglobin and oxygen can be represented by the following equilibrium:
Hb1aq2  4O2 1g2 ∆ Hb1O2 2 4 1aq2
Hemoglobin

Oxyhemoglobin

At high altitudes, where the oxygen content of the air is lower, the position of this equilibrium
will shift to the left, according to Le Châtelier’s principle. Because less oxyhemoglobin is
formed, fatigue, dizziness, and even a serious illness called high-altitude sickness can result.
One way to combat this problem is to use supplemental oxygen, as most high-altitude mountain climbers do. However, this is impractical for people who live at high elevations. In fact,
the human body adapts to the lower oxygen concentrations by making more hemoglobin,
causing the equilibrium to shift back to the right. Someone moving from Chicago to Boulder,
Colorado (5300 feet), would notice the effects of the new altitude for a couple of weeks,
but as the hemoglobin level increased, the effects would disappear. This change is called
high-altitude acclimatization, which explains why athletes who want to compete at high elevations should practice there for several weeks prior to the event.
Our understanding of the biologic role of iron also allows us to explain the toxicities
of substances such as carbon monoxide and the cyanide ion. Both CO and CN are very
good ligands toward iron and so can interfere with the normal workings of the iron complexes
in the body. For example, carbon monoxide has about 200 times the afﬁnity for the Fe2 in
hemoglobin as oxygen does. The resulting stable complex, carboxyhemoglobin, prevents
the normal uptake of O2, thus depriving the body of needed oxygen. Asphyxiation can result
if enough carbon monoxide is present in the air. The mechanism for the toxicity of the
cyanide ion is somewhat different. Cyanide coordinates strongly to cytochrome oxidase, an
iron-containing cytochrome enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation–reduction reactions of
certain cytochromes. The coordinated cyanide thus prevents the electron-transfer process
and rapid death results. Because of its behavior, cyanide is called a respiratory inhibitor.

Sherpa and Balti porters are acclimatized to
high elevations such as those around the
K2 mountain peak in Pakistan.

978

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Supercharged Blood
uring the 1964 Winter Olympics in Innsbruck, Austria,
a Finn named Eero Maentyranta won three gold medals
in cross-country skiing and immediately became a national
hero. His success was due in no small part to the fact that
his blood carried 25% to 50% more hemoglobin than the average man’s blood. Maentyranta suffered from a rare genetic
disorder that results in unusually elevated levels of red blood
cells. This extra oxygen-carrying capacity lends itself to increased stamina and endurance, certainly an advantage in
the rigorous sport of cross-country skiing. Several years
later, geneticists at the University of Helsinki determined
that the disorder was due to a mutation of a protein responsible for red blood cell production called the erythropoietin
receptor (EPO-R). The mutation, which was common in the
Maentyranta family, resulted in a protein that was missing
70 amino acids (out of 550). This mutation deleted the portion of the protein that contained the “off switch” for red
blood cell production.
Since the discovery of EPO’s role in red blood cell production, genetic engineers have been able to synthesize EPO

D

21.8

by bioengineering techniques. The protein, marketed in the
United States by Amgen of Thousand Oaks, California, is
used by kidney dialysis, AIDS, and cancer patients to boost
red blood cell production. It has become biotechnology’s
biggest revenue producer, with over $1 billion in annual
sales.
While the potential beneﬁts of this protein are obvious,
the potential for abuse may be even greater. The Tour de
France, thought by many to be the world’s greatest endurance
race, was rocked in 1998 by controversy when several riders
(including three race favorites) were expelled from the race
over allegations of blood doping with the red blood cell–
enchancing hormone EPO. EPO has become the drug of
choice for many endurance athletes trying to gain an unfair
advantage because it is metabolized quickly and, being identical to the body’s own EPO, is almost impossible to detect
by blood or urine analysis. But the hazards are great. Endurance athletes are especially at risk from abuse of EPO due
to extreme water loss during the athletic competition, which,
when coupled with elevated levels of EPO, results in an

Metallurgy and Iron and Steel Production

In the preceding section we saw the importance of iron in biologic systems. Of course,
iron is also very important in many other ways in our world. In this section we will discuss
the isolation of metals from their natural sources and the formulation of metals into useful
materials, with special emphasis on the role of iron.
Metals are very important for structural applications, electrical wires, cooking utensils,
tools, decorative items, and many other purposes. However, because the main chemical
characteristic of a metal is its ability to give up electrons, almost all metals in nature are
found in ores, combined with nonmetals such as oxygen, sulfur, and the halogens. To
recover and use these metals, we must separate them from their ores and reduce the metal
ions. Then, because most metals are unsuitable for use in the pure state, we must form
alloys that have the desired properties. The process of separating a metal from its ore and
preparing it for use is known as metallurgy. The steps in this process are typically
1. Mining
2. Pretreatment of the ore
3. Reduction to the free metal
4. Puriﬁcation of the metal (reﬁning)
5. Alloying

A steel mill in Brazil.

An ore can be viewed as a mixture containing minerals (relatively pure metal compounds) and gangue (sand, clay, and rock). Some typical minerals are listed in Table 21.19.
Although silicate minerals are the most common in the earth’s crust, they are typically

21.8

extreme thickening of the blood. This
puts an obvious strain on the heart. Since
EPO became available in 1986, several
world-class athletes (mostly bicyclists
and distance runners) have died under
mysterious circumstances thought to be
associated with abuse of EPO. Because
of the widespread abuse of EPO, new
methods of detection have been put in
place to limit its impact on organized
sports and its participants.
The advantage that Eero Maentyranta gained in the 1964 Olympics was
the result of a disorder that he had lived
with for his entire life. His body had
become accustomed to operating with
elevated levels of hemoglobin, and it
became a natural advantage. Synthetic
EPO holds much promise for those
suffering conditions that result in hemoglobin deﬁciency. But as a performanceenhancing drug, EPO’s advantages come
with enormous risk.

Metallurgy and Iron and Steel Production

The 1998 Tour de France.

TABLE 21.19

Common Minerals Found in Ores

Anion

Examples

None (free metal)
Oxide

Au, Ag, Pt, Pd, Rh, Ir, Ru
Fe2O3 (hematite)
Fe3O4 (magnetite)
Al2O3 (bauxite)
SnO2 (cassiterite)
PbS (galena)
ZnS (sphalerite)
FeS2 (pyrite)
HgS (cinnabar)
Cu2S (chalcocite)
NaCl (rock salt)
KCl (sylvite)
KCl  MgCl2 (carnalite)
FeCO3 (siderite)
CaCO3 (limestone)
MgCO3 (magnesite)
MgCO3  CaCO3 (dolomite)
CaSO4  2H2O (gypsum)
BaSO4 (barite)
Be3Al2Si6O18 (beryl)
Al2(Si2O8)(OH)4 (kaolinite)
LiAl(SiO3)2 (spondumene)

Sulﬁde

Chloride

Carbonate

Sulfate
Silicate

979

980

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
very hard and difﬁcult to process, making metal extraction relatively expensive. Therefore, other ores are used when available.
After mining, an ore must be treated to remove the gangue and to concentrate the
mineral. The ore is ﬁrst pulverized and then processed in a variety of devices, including
cyclone separators (see Fig. 21.34), inclined vibrating tables, and ﬂotation tanks.
In the ﬂotation process, the crushed ore is fed into a tank containing a water–
oil–detergent mixture. Because of the difference in the surface characteristics of the mineral
particles and the silicate rock particles, the oil wets the mineral particles. A stream of air
blown through the mixture causes tiny bubbles to form on the oil-covered pieces, which
then ﬂoat to the surface, where they can be skimmed off.
After the mineral has been concentrated, it is often chemically altered in preparation for the reduction step. For example, nonoxide minerals are often converted to
oxides before reduction. Carbonates and hydroxides can be converted by simple
heating:
CaCO3 1s2 ¡ CaO1s2  CO2 1g2
Heat
Mg1OH2 2 1s2 ¡ MgO1s2  H2O1g2
Heat

FIGURE 21.34
A schematic diagram of a cyclone separator.
The ore is pulverized and blown into the
separator. The more dense mineral particles
are thrown toward the walls by centrifugal
force and fall down the funnel. The lighter
particles (gangue) tend to stay closer to the
center and are drawn out through the top
by the stream of air.

Sulﬁde minerals can be converted to oxides by heating in air at temperatures below their
melting points, a process called roasting:
2ZnS1s2  3O2 1g2 ¡ 2ZnO1s2  2SO2 1g2
Heat

As we have seen earlier, sulfur dioxide causes severe problems if released into the atmosphere, and modern roasting operations collect this gas and use it in the manufacture
of sulfuric acid.
The method chosen to reduce the metal ion to the free metal, a process called smelting, depends on the afﬁnity of the metal ion for electrons. Some metals are good enough
oxidizing agents that the free metal is produced in the roasting process. For example, the
roasting reaction for cinnabar is
HgS1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ Hg1l2  SO2 1g2
Heat

where the Hg2 is reduced by electrons donated by the S2 ion, which is then further oxidized by O2 to form SO2.
The roasting of a more active metal produces the metal oxide, which must be reduced
to obtain the free metal. The most common reducing agents are coke (impure carbon),
carbon monoxide, and hydrogen. The following are some common examples of the reduction process:
Fe2O3 1s2  3CO1g2 ¡ 2Fe1l2  3CO2 1g2
Heat
WO3 1s2  3H2 1g2 ¡ W1l2  3H2O1g2
Heat
ZnO1s2  C1s2 ¡ Zn1l2  CO1g2
Heat

The most active metals, such as aluminum and the alkali metals, must be reduced
electrolytically, usually from molten salts (see Section 17.8).
The metal obtained in the reduction step is invariably impure and must be reﬁned.
The methods of reﬁning include electrolytic reﬁning (see Section 17.8), oxidation of
impurities (as for iron, see below), and distillation of low-boiling metals such as mercury and zinc. One process used when highly pure metals are needed is zone reﬁning.
In this process a bar of the impure metal travels through a heater (see Fig. 21.35), which
causes melting and recrystallizing of the metal as the bar cools. Puriﬁcation of the metal
occurs because as the crystal re-forms, the metal ions are likely to ﬁt much better in the
crystal lattice than are the atoms of impurities. Thus the impurities tend to be excluded
and carried to the end of the bar. Several repetitions of this process give a very pure
metal bar.

21.8

Impure
solid

FIGURE 21.35
A schematic representation of zone reﬁning.

Metallurgy and Iron and Steel Production

981

Purified
solid

Impurities are Molten
concentrated zone
here

Hydrometallurgy
The metallurgical processes we have considered so far are usually called pyrometallurgy
(pyro means “at high temperatures”). These traditional methods require large quantities
of energy and have two other serious problems: atmospheric pollution (mainly by sulfur
dioxide) and relatively high costs that make treatment of low-grade ores economically
unfeasible.
In the past hundred years, a different process, hydrometallurgy (hydro means
“water”), has been employed to extract metals from ores by use of aqueous chemical
solutions, a process called leaching. The ﬁrst two uses of hydrometallurgy were for the
extraction of gold from low-grade ores and for the production of aluminum oxide, or
alumina, from bauxite, an aluminum-bearing ore.
Gold is sometimes found in ores in the elemental state, but it usually occurs in relatively small concentrations. A process called cyanidation treats the crushed ore with an
aqueous cyanide solution in the presence of air to dissolve the gold by forming the complex ion Au(CN) 2:
4Au1s2  8CN 1aq2  O2 1g2  2H2O1l2 ¡ 4Au1CN2 2 1aq2  4OH 1aq2

Pure gold is then recovered by reaction of the solution of Au(CN)2 with zinc powder to
reduce Au to Au:
2Au1CN2 2 1aq2  Zn1s2 ¡ 2Au1s2  Zn1CN2 42 1aq2
The extraction of alumina from bauxite (the Bayer process) leaches the ore with
sodium hydroxide at high temperatures and pressures to dissolve the amphoteric aluminum
oxide:
Al2O3 1s2  2OH 1aq2 ¡ 2AlO2 1aq2  H2O1l2

Precipitation reactions are discussed in
Section 15.7.

This process leaves behind solid impurities such as SiO2, Fe2O3, and TiO2, which are not
appreciably soluble in basic solution. After the solid impurities are removed, the pH of
the solution is lowered, causing the pure aluminum oxide to re-form. It is then electrolyzed
to produce aluminum metal (see Section 17.8).
As illustrated by these processes, hydrometallurgy involves two distinct steps: selective leaching of a given metal ion from the ore and recovery of the metal ion from the solution by selective precipitation as an ionic compound.
The leaching agent can simply be water if the metal-containing compound is a
water-soluble chloride or sulfate. However, most commonly, the metal is present in
a water-insoluble substance that must somehow be dissolved. The leaching agents used
in such cases are usually aqueous solutions containing acids, bases, oxidizing agents,
salts, or some combination of these. Often the dissolving process involves the formation of complex ions. For example, when an ore containing water-insoluble lead sulfate
is treated with an aqueous sodium chloride solution, the soluble complex ion PbCl42
is formed:
PbSO4 1s2  4Na 1aq2  4Cl 1aq2 ¡ 4Na 1aq2  PbCl42 1aq2  SO42 1aq2

982

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

TABLE 21.20
Solutions

Examples of Methods for Recovery of Metal Ions from Leaching

Method

Examples

Precipitation of a salt

Cu2(aq)  S2(aq) ¡ CuS(s)
Cu(aq)  HCN(aq) ¡ CuCN(s)  H(aq)
Au(aq)  Fe2(aq) ¡ Au(s)  Fe3(aq)
Cu2(aq)  Fe(s) ¡ Cu(s)  Fe2(aq)
Ni2(aq)  H2(g) ¡ Ni(s)  2H(aq)
Cu2(aq)  2e ¡ Cu(s)
Al3(aq)  3e ¡ Al(s)
2Cu2(aq)  2Cl(aq)  H2SO3(aq)  H2O(l) ¡
2CuCl(s)  3H(aq)  HSO4(aq)

Reduction

⎧ Chemical
⎪
⎨
⎪ Electrolytic
⎩

Reduction plus precipitation

Formation of a complex ion also occurs in the cyanidation process for the recovery
of gold. However, since the gold is present in the ore as particles of metal, it must ﬁrst
be oxidized by oxygen to produce Au, which then reacts with CN to form the soluble
Au(CN)2 species. Thus, in this case, the leaching process involves a combination of
oxidation and complexation.
Sometimes just oxidation is used. For example, insoluble zinc sulﬁde can be converted to soluble zinc sulfate by pulverizing the ore and suspending it in water to form a
slurry through which oxygen is bubbled:
ZnS1s2  2O2 1g2 ¡ Zn2 1aq2  SO42 1aq2
One advantage of hydrometallurgy over the traditional processes is that sometimes
the leaching agent can be pumped directly into the ore deposits in the earth. For example, aqueous sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) can be injected into uranium-bearing ores to
form water-soluble complex carbonate ions.
Recovering the metal ions from the leaching solution involves forming an insoluble
solid containing the metal ion to be recovered. This step may involve addition of an anion to form an insoluble salt, reduction to the solid metal, or a combination of reduction
and precipitation of a salt. Examples of these processes are shown in Table 21.20. Because
of its suitability for treating low-grade ores economically and without signiﬁcant pollution, hydrometallurgy is becoming more popular for recovering many important metals
such as copper, nickel, zinc, and uranium.

The Metallurgy of Iron
Iron is present in the earth’s crust in many types of minerals. Iron pyrite (FeS2) is
widely distributed but is not suitable for production of metallic iron and steel because
it is almost impossible to remove the last traces of sulfur. The presence of sulfur makes
the resulting steel too brittle to be useful. Siderite (FeCO3) is a valuable iron mineral
that can be converted to iron oxide by heating. The iron oxide minerals are hematite
(Fe2O3), the more abundant, and magnetite (Fe3O4, really FeO  Fe2O3). Taconite ores
contain iron oxides mixed with silicates and are more difﬁcult to process than the
others. However, taconite ores are being increasingly used as the more desirable ores
are consumed.
To concentrate the iron in iron ores, advantage is taken of the natural magnetism of
Fe3O4 (hence its name, magnetite). The Fe3O4 particles can be separated from the gangue
by magnets. The ores that are not magnetic are often converted to Fe3O4; hematite is
partially reduced to magnetite, while siderite is ﬁrst converted to FeO thermally, then

21.8

Metallurgy and Iron and Steel Production

983

Iron ore, limestone,
and coke
Exhaust gases

200°C

800°C

1000°C

1300°C

3Fe2O3 + CO 2Fe3O4 + CO2
Fe3O4 + CO 3FeO + CO2
FeO + CO Fe + CO2
Fe + CO2 FeO + CO
C + CO2 2CO
CaCO3 CaO + CO2

Slag formation
CaO + SiO2 CaSiO3
C + CO2

C + O2
Oxygen-enriched air

2CO

CO2

1900°C
Slag

FIGURE 21.36
The blast furnace used in the production
of iron.

Pig iron

oxidized to Fe2O3, and then reduced to Fe3O4:
FeCO3 1s2 ¡ FeO1s2  CO2 1g2
4FeO1s2  O2 1g2 ¡ 2Fe2O3 1s2
3Fe2O3 1s2  C1s2 ¡ 2Fe3O4 1s2  CO1g2
Heat

Sometimes the nonmagnetic ores are concentrated by ﬂotation processes.
The most commonly used reduction process for iron takes place in the blast furnace
(Fig. 21.36). The raw materials required are concentrated iron ore, coke, and limestone
(which serves as a ﬂux to trap impurities). The furnace, which is approximately 25 feet
in diameter, is charged from the top with a mixture of iron ore, coke, and limestone. A
very strong blast (350 mi/h) of hot air is injected at the bottom, where the oxygen reacts with the carbon in the coke to form carbon monoxide, the reducing agent for the iron.
The temperature of the charge increases as it travels down the furnace, with reduction of
the iron to iron metal occurring in steps:
3Fe2O3  CO ¡ 2Fe3O4  CO2
Fe3O4  CO ¡ 3FeO  CO2
FeO  CO ¡ Fe  CO2
Iron can reduce carbon dioxide,
Fe  CO2 ¡ FeO  CO
so complete reduction of the iron occurs only if the carbon dioxide is destroyed by adding
excess coke:
CO2  C ¡ 2CO

984

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
The limestone (CaCO3) in the charge loses carbon dioxide, or calcines, in the hot furnace
and combines with silica and other impurities to form slag, which is mostly molten calcium silicate, CaSiO3,
CaO  SiO2 ¡ CaSiO3
and alumina (Al2O3). The slag ﬂoats on the molten iron and is skimmed off. The gas that
escapes from the top of the furnace contains carbon monoxide, which is combined with
air to form carbon dioxide. The energy released in this exothermic reaction is collected
in a heat exchanger and used in heating the furnace.
The iron collected from the blast furnace, called pig iron, is quite impure. It contains
90% iron, 5% carbon, 2% manganese, 1% silicon, 0.3% phosphorus, and
0.04% sulfur (from impurities in the coke). The production of 1 ton of pig iron requires
approximately 1.7 tons of iron ore, 0.5 ton of coke, 0.25 ton of limestone, and 2 tons
of air.
Iron oxide also can be reduced in a direct reduction furnace, which operates at
much lower temperatures (1300–2000F) than a blast furnace and produces a solid
“sponge iron” rather than molten iron. Because of the milder reaction conditions, the
direct reduction furnace requires a higher grade of iron ore (with fewer impurities) than
that used in a blast furnace. The iron from the direct reduction furnace is called DRI
(directly reduced iron) and contains 95% iron, with the balance mainly silica and
alumina.

Production of Steel
Steel is an alloy and can be classiﬁed as carbon steel, which contains up to about 1.5%
carbon, or alloy steel, which contains carbon plus other metals such as Cr, Co, Mn, and
Mo. The wide range of mechanical properties associated with steel is determined by its
chemical composition and by the heat treatment of the ﬁnal product.
The production of iron from its ore is fundamentally a reduction process, but the conversion of iron to steel is basically an oxidation process in which unwanted impurities are
eliminated. Oxidation is carried out in various ways, but the two most common are the
open hearth process and the basic oxygen process.
In the oxidation reactions of steelmaking, the manganese, phosphorus, and silicon
in the impure iron react with oxygen to form oxides, which in turn react with appropriate ﬂuxes to form slag. Sulfur enters the slag primarily as sulﬁdes, and excess
carbon forms carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide. The ﬂux chosen depends on the
major impurities present. If manganese is the chief impurity, an acidic ﬂux of silica is
used:
MnO1s2  SiO2 1s2 ¡ MnSiO3 1l2
Heat

If the main impurity is silicon or phosphorus, a basic ﬂux, usually lime (CaO) or magnesia (MgO), is needed to give reactions such as
SiO2 1s2  MgO1s2 ¡ MgSiO3 1l2
Heat
P4O10 1s2  6CaO1s2 ¡ 2Ca3 1PO4 2 2 1l2
Heat

Whether an acidic or a basic slag will be needed is a factor that must be considered when
a furnace is constructed so that its refractory linings will be compatible with the slag. Silica bricks would deteriorate quickly in the presence of basic slag, and magnesia or lime
bricks would dissolve in acid slag.
The open hearth process (Fig. 21.37) uses a dishlike container that holds 100 to
200 tons of molten iron. An external heat source is required to keep the iron molten,
and a concave roof over the container reﬂects heat back toward the iron surface. A blast
of air or oxygen is passed over the surface of the iron to react with impurities. Silicon

21.8

Metallurgy and Iron and Steel Production

985

Gas or
liquid fuel
Burner

FIGURE 21.37
A schematic diagram of the open hearth
process for steelmaking. The checker chambers contain bricks that absorb heat from
gases passing over the molten charge.
The ﬂow of air and gases is reversed
periodically.

Molten metal

Air

Alternate
burner

Tap hole

Hearth

Checker chamber

Burned
gases

Slag pot

Steel ladle

Checker chamber

and manganese are oxidized ﬁrst and enter the slag, followed by oxidation of carbon
to carbon monoxide, which causes agitation and foaming of the molten bath. The
exothermic oxidation of carbon raises the temperature of the bath, causing the limestone
ﬂux to calcine:
Heat

CaCO3 ¡ CaO  CO2
The resulting lime ﬂoats to the top of the molten mixture (an event called the lime boil),
where it combines with phosphates, sulfates, and silicates. Next comes the reﬁning process,
which involves continued oxidation of carbon and other impurities. Because the melting
point increases as the carbon content decreases, the bath temperatures must be increased
during this phase of the operation. If the carbon content falls below that desired in the ﬁnal product, coke or pig iron may be added.
The ﬁnal composition of the steel is “ﬁne-tuned” after the charge is poured. For example, aluminum is sometimes added at this stage to remove trace amounts of oxygen via
the reaction
4Al  3O2 ¡ 2Al2O3
Oxygen

Flux

Molten metal

FIGURE 21.38
The basic oxygen process for steelmaking.

Alloying metals such as vanadium, chromium, titanium, manganese, and nickel are also
added to give the steel the properties needed for a speciﬁc application.
The processing of a batch of steel by the open hearth process is quite slow, taking
up to 8 hours. The basic oxygen process is much faster. Molten pig iron and scrap iron
are placed in a barrel-shaped container (Fig. 21.38) that can hold as much as 300 tons
of material. A high-pressure blast of oxygen is directed at the surface of the molten iron,
oxidizing impurities in a manner very similar to that used in the open hearth process.
Fluxes are added after the oxygen blow begins. One advantage of this process is that the
exothermic oxidation reactions proceed so rapidly that they produce enough heat to raise
the temperature nearly to the boiling point of iron without an external heat source. Also,
at these high temperatures only about an hour is needed to complete the oxidation
processes.
The electric arc method, which was once used only for small batches of specialty
steels, is being utilized more and more in the steel industry. In this process an electric arc
between carbon electrodes is used to melt the charge. This means that no fuel-borne impurities are added to the steel, since no fuel is needed. Also, higher temperatures are possible than in the open hearth or basic oxygen processes, and this leads to more effective
removal of sulfur and phosphorus impurities. Oxygen is added in this process so that the
oxide impurities in the steel can be controlled effectively.

986

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

TABLE 21.21

Percent Composition and Uses of Various Types of Steel

Type of
Steel

%
Carbon

%
Manganese

%
Phosphorus

%
Sulfur

%
Silicon

%
Nickel

%
Chromium

%
Other

Plain carbon

1.35

1.65

0.04

0.05

0.60

—

—

—

High-strength
(low-alloy)

0.25

1.65

0.04

0.05

0.15–
0.9

0.4–1

0.3–1.3

Cu (0.2–0.6)
Sb (0.01–0.08)
V (0.01–0.08)

Alloy

1.00

3.50

0.04

0.05

0.15–
2.0

0.25–
10.0

0.25–4.0

Stainless

0.03–
1.2

1.0–10

0.04–
0.06

0.03

1–3

1–22

4.0–27

Mo (0.08–4.0)
V (0–0.2)
W (0–18)
Co (0–5)
—

—

—

—

—

0.5–
5.0

—

—

—

Silicon

Uses
Sheet steel,
tools
Transportation
equipment,
structural
beams
Automobile
and aircraft
engine parts
Engine parts,
steam turbine
parts, kitchen
utensils
Electric
motors and
transformers

Heat Treatment of Steel

Refer to Section 10.3 for a review of
packing and crystal lattices.

One way of producing the desired physical properties in steel is by controlling the chemical composition (see Table 21.21). Another method for tailoring the properties of steel
involves heat treatment. Pure iron exists in two different crystalline forms, depending on
the temperature. At any temperature below 912°C, iron has a body-centered cubic structure
and is called a-iron. Between 912°C and 1394°C, iron has a face-centered cubic structure
called austentite, or g-iron. At 1394°C, iron changes to d-iron, a body-centered cubic
structure identical to a-iron.
When iron is alloyed with carbon, which ﬁts into holes among the iron atoms to form
the interstitial alloy carbon steel, the situation becomes even more complex. For example, the temperature at which a-iron changes to austentite is lowered by about 200°C.
Also, at high temperatures iron and carbon react by an endothermic reversible reaction to
form an iron carbide called cementite:
3Fe  C  energy ∆ Fe3C
(Heat)

Cementite

By Le Châtelier’s principle, we can predict that cementite will become more stable relative to iron and carbon as the temperature is increased. This is the observed result.
Thus steel is really a mixture of iron metal in one of its crystal forms, carbon, and
cementite. The proportions of these components are very important in determining the
physical properties of steel.
When steel is heated to temperatures in the region of 1000°C, much of the carbon
is converted to cementite. If the steel is then allowed to cool slowly, the equilibrium
shown above shifts to the left, and small crystals of carbon precipitate, giving a steel
that is relatively ductile. If the cooling is very rapid, the equilibrium does not have time
to adjust. The cementite is trapped, and the steel has a high cementite content, making
it quite brittle. The proportions of carbon crystals and cementite can be “ﬁne-tuned” to
give the desired properties by heating to intermediate temperatures followed by rapid
cooling, a process called tempering. The rate of heating and cooling determines not
only the amounts of cementite present but also the size of its crystals and the form of
crystalline iron present.

For Review

Key Terms
Section 21.1
complex ion
ﬁrst-row transition metals
lanthanide contraction
lanthanide series

Section 21.3
coordination compound
counterion
oxidation state
coordination number
ligand
coordinate covalent bond
monodentate (unidentate) ligand
chelating ligand (chelate)
bidentate ligand

Section 21.4
isomers
structural isomerism
stereoisomerism
coordination isomerism
linkage isomerism
geometrical (cis–trans) isomerism
trans isomer
cis isomer
optical isomerism
chiral
enantiomers

Section 21.6
crystal ﬁeld model
d-orbital splitting
strong-ﬁeld (low-spin) case
weak-ﬁeld (high-spin) case
spectrochemical series

Section 21.7
cytochromes
heme
porphyrin
myoglobin
hemoglobin
carboxyhemoglobin

Section 21.8
metallurgy
minerals
gangue
ﬂotation process
roasting
smelting
zone reﬁning
pyrometallurgy
hydrometallurgy
leaching
cyanidation
blast furnace
slag
pig iron

987

For Review
First-row transition metals (scandium–zinc)
䊉 All have one or more electrons in the 4s orbital and various numbers of 3d
electrons
䊉 All exhibit metallic properties
• A particular element often shows more than one oxidation state in its compounds
䊉 Most compounds are colored, and many are paramagnetic
䊉 Most commonly form coordination compounds containing a complex ion involving ligands (Lewis bases) attached to a central transition metal ion
• The number of attached ligands (called the coordination number) can vary from
2 to 8, with 4 and 6 being most common
䊉 Many transition metal ions have major biologic importance in molecules such as
enzymes and those that transport and store oxygen
• Chelating ligands form more than one bond to the transition metal ion
Isomerism
䊉 Isomers: two or more compounds with the same formula but different properties
• Coordination isomerism: the composition of the coordination sphere varies
• Linkage isomerism: the point of attachment of one or more ligands varies
• Stereoisomerism: isomers have identical bonds but different spatial arrangements
• Geometric isomerism: ligands assume different relative positions in the coordination sphere; examples are cis and trans isomers
• Optical isomerism: molecules with nonsuperimposable mirror images rotate
plane-polarized light in opposite directions
Spectral and magnetic properties
䊉 Usually explained in terms of the crystal ﬁeld model
䊉 Model assumes the ligands are point charges that split the energies of the 3d orbitals
䊉 Color and magnetism are explained in terms of how the 3d electrons occupy the
split 3d energy levels
• Strong-ﬁeld case: relatively large orbital splitting
• Weak-ﬁeld case: relatively small orbital splitting
Metallurgy
䊉 The processes connected with separating a metal from its ore
• The minerals in ores are often converted to oxides (roasting) before being reduced to the metal (smelting)
䊉 The metallurgy of iron: most common method for reduction uses a blast furnace;
process involves iron ore, coke, and limestone
• Impure product (90% iron) is called pig iron
䊉 Steel is manufactured by oxidizing the impurities in pig iron

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What two ﬁrst-row transition metals have unexpected electron conﬁgurations? A
statement in the text says that ﬁrst-row transition metal ions do not have 4s
electrons. Why not? Why do transition metal ions often have several oxidation
states, whereas representative metals generally have only one?
2. Deﬁne each of the following terms:
a. coordination compound
b. complex ion
c. counterions
d. coordination number

988

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

direct reduction furnace
carbon steel
alloy steel
open hearth process
basic oxygen process
electric arc method
tempering

3.

4.

5.

6.

e. ligand
f. chelate
g. bidentate
How would transition metal ions be classiﬁed using the Lewis deﬁnition of
acids and bases? What must a ligand have to bond to a metal? What do we
mean when we say that a bond is a “coordinate covalent bond”?
When a metal ion has a coordination number of 2, 4, or 6, what are the observed geometries and associated bond angles? For each of the following, give
the correct formulas for the complex ions.
a. linear Ag complex ions having CN ligands
b. tetrahedral Cu complex ions having H2O ligands
c. tetrahedral Mn2 complex ions having oxalate ligands
d. square planar Pt2 complex ions having NH3 ligands
e. octahedral Fe3 complex ions having EDTA ligands
f. octahedral Co2 complex ions having Cl ligands
g. octahedral Cr3 complex ions having ethylenediamine ligands
What is the electron conﬁguration for the metal ion in each of the complex ions
in a–g?
What is wrong with the following formula–name combinations? Give the correct names for each.
a. [Cu(NH3)4]Cl2
copperammine chloride
b. [Ni(en)2]SO4
bis(ethylenediamine)nickel(IV) sulfate
c. K[Cr(H2O)2Cl4]
potassium tetrachlorodiaquachromium(III)
d. Na4[Co(CN)4C2O4]
tetrasodium tetracyanooxalatocobaltate(II)
Deﬁne each of the following and give examples of each.
a. isomer
b. structural isomer
c. stereoisomer
d. coordination isomer
e. linkage isomer
f. geometrical isomer
g. optical isomer
Consider the cis and trans forms of the octahedral complex Cr(en)2Cl2. Are
both of these isomers optically active? Explain.
Another way to determine whether a substance is optically active is to look
for a plane of symmetry in the molecule. If a substance has a plane of symmetry, then it will not exhibit optical activity (the mirror image will be superimposable). Show the plane of symmetry in the trans isomer and prove to yourself
that the cis isomer does not have a plane of symmetry.
What is the major focus of the crystal ﬁeld model? Why are the d orbitals split
into two sets for an octahedral complex? What are the two sets of orbitals?
Deﬁne each of the following.
a. weak-ﬁeld ligand
b. strong-ﬁeld ligand
c. low-spin complex
d. high-spin complex
Why is Co(NH3)63 diamagnetic whereas CoF63 is paramagnetic? Some octahedral complex ions have the same d-orbital splitting diagrams whether they are
high-spin or low-spin. For which of the following is this true?
a. V3
b. Ni2
c. Ru2

Questions

989

7. The crystal ﬁeld model predicts magnetic properties of complex ions and explains the colors of these complex ions. How? Solutions of [Cr(NH3)6]Cl3 are
yellow, but Cr(NH3)63 does not absorb yellow light. Why? What color light is
absorbed by Cr(NH3)63? What is the spectrochemical series, and how can the
study of light absorbed by various complex ions be used to develop this series?
Would you expect Co(NH3)62 to absorb light of a longer or shorter wavelength
than Co(NH3)63? Explain. Compounds of copper(II) are generally colored, but
compounds of copper(I) are not colored. Explain. Would you expect Cd(NH3)4Cl2
to be colored? Explain. Compounds of Sc3 are not colored, but those of Ti3
and V3 are colored. Explain.
8. Why do tetrahedral complex ions have a different crystal ﬁeld diagram than
octahedral complex ions? What is the tetrahedral crystal ﬁeld diagram? Why are
virtually all tetrahedral complex ions “high spin”?
Explain the crystal ﬁeld diagram for square planar complex ions and for
linear complex ions.
9. Review Table 21.18, which lists some important biological functions associated
with different ﬁrst-row transition metals. The transport of O2 in the blood is
carried out by hemoglobin. Brieﬂy explain how hemoglobin transports O2 in the
blood. Why are CN and CO toxic to humans and animals?
10. Deﬁne and give an example of each of the following.
a. roasting
b. smelting
c. ﬂotation
d. leaching
e. gangue
What are the advantages and disadvantages of hydrometallurgy? Describe the
process by which a metal is puriﬁed by zone reﬁning.

Active Learning Questions
These questions are designed to be used by groups of students in class. The
questions allow students to explore their understanding of concepts through
discussion and peer teaching. The real value of these questions is the
learning that occurs while students talk to each other about chemical
concepts.

1. You isolate a compound with the formula PtCl4  2KCl. From electrical conductance tests of an aqueous solution of the compound,
you ﬁnd that three ions per formula unit are present, and you also
notice that addition of AgNO3 does not cause a precipitate. Give the
formula for this compound that shows the complex ion present. Explain your ﬁndings. Name this compound.
2. Both Ni(NH3)42 and Ni(CN)42 have four ligands. The ﬁrst is
paramagnetic, and the second is diamagnetic. Are the complex
ions tetrahedral or square planar? Explain.
3. Which is more likely to be paramagnetic, Fe(CN)64 or Fe(H2O)62?
Explain.
4. A metal ion in a high-spin octahedral complex has two more
unpaired electrons than the same ion does in a low-spin octahedral complex. Name some possible metal ions for which this
would be true.

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

Questions
5. Oxalic acid is often used to remove rust stains. What properties
of oxalic acid allow it to do this?
6. Four different octahedral chromium coordination compounds exist that all have the same oxidation state for chromium and have
H2O and Cl as the ligands and counterions. When 1 mol of each
of the four compounds is dissolved in water, how many mol of
silver chloride will precipitate upon addition of excess AgNO3?
7. Figure 21.17 shows that the cis isomer of Co(en)2Cl2 is optically
active while the trans isomer is not optically active. Is the same
true for Co(NH3)4Cl2? Explain.
8. A certain ﬁrst-row transition metal ion forms many different colored
solutions. When four coordination compounds of this metal, each having the same coordination number, are dissolved in water, the colors
of the solutions are red, yellow, green, and blue. Further experiments
reveal that two of the complex ions are paramagnetic with four unpaired electrons and the other two are diamagnetic. What can be deduced from this information about the four coordination compounds?

990

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

9. CoCl42 forms a tetrahedral complex ion and Co(CN)63 forms
an octahedral complex ion. What is wrong about the following
statements concerning each complex ion and the d orbital splitting diagrams?
a. CoCl42 is an example of a strong-ﬁeld case having two unpaired electrons.
b. Because CN is a weak ﬁeld ligand, Co(CN)63 will be a low
spin case having four unpaired electrons.
10. The following statements discuss some coordination compounds.
For each coordination compound, give the complex ion and the
counterions, the electron conﬁguration of the transition metal,
and the geometry of the complex ion.
a. CoCl2  6H2O is a compound used in novelty devices that predict
rain.
b. During the developing process of black-and-white ﬁlm, silver
bromide is removed from photographic ﬁlm by the ﬁxer. The
major component of the ﬁxer is sodium thiosulfate. The equation for the reaction is:
AgBr1s2  2Na2S2O3 1aq2 ¡ Na3 3Ag1S2O3 2 2 4 1aq2  NaBr1aq2
c. The compound cisplatin, Pt(NH3)2Cl2, has been studied extensively as an antitumor agent. The reaction for the synthesis of
cisplatin is:
K2PtCl4 1aq2  2NH3 1aq2 ¡ Pt1NH3 2 2Cl2 1s2  2KCl1aq2
Assume these platinum complex ions have a square planar
geometry.
d. In the production of printed circuit boards for the electronics
industry, a thin layer of copper is laminated onto an insulating
plastic board. Next, a circuit pattern made of a chemically resistant polymer is printed on the board. The unwanted copper
is removed by chemical etching, and the protective polymer is
ﬁnally removed by solvents. One etching reaction is:
Cu1NH3 2 4Cl2 1aq2  4NH3 1aq2  Cu1s2 ¡ 2Cu1NH3 2 4Cl1aq2
Assume these copper complex ions have tetrahedral geometry.
11. What causes high-altitude sickness and what is high-altitude
acclimatization?
12. Almost all metals in nature are found as ionic compounds in ores
instead of being in the pure state. Why? What must be done to a sample of ore to obtain a metal substance that has desirable properties?

Exercises
In this section similar exercises are paired.

16. Write electron conﬁgurations for each of the following.
a. Cr, Cr2, Cr3
b. Cu, Cu, Cu2
c. V, V2, V3
17. What is the electron conﬁguration for the transition metal ion in
each of the following compounds?
a. K3[Fe(CN)6]
b. [Ag(NH3)2]Cl
c. [Ni(H2O)6]Br2
d. [Cr(H2O)4(NO2)2]I
18. What is the electron conﬁguration for the transition metal ion(s)
in each of the following compounds?
a. (NH4)2[Fe(H2O)2Cl4]
b. [Co(NH3)2(NH2CH2CH2NH2)2]I2
c. Na2[TaF7]
d. [Pt(NH3)4I2][PtI4]
Pt forms 2 and 4 oxidation states in compounds.
19. Molybdenum is obtained as a by-product of copper mining or is
mined directly (primary deposits are in the Rocky Mountains in
Colorado). In both cases it is obtained as MoS2, which is then
converted to MoO3. The MoO3 can be used directly in the
production of stainless steel for high-speed tools (which accounts
for about 85% of the molybdenum used). Molybdenum can
be puriﬁed by dissolving MoO3 in aqueous ammonia and crystallizing ammonium molybdate. Depending on conditions, either
(NH4)2Mo2O7 or (NH4 ) 6Mo7O24  4H2O is obtained.
a. Give names for MoS2 and MoO3.
b. What is the oxidation state of Mo in each of the compounds
mentioned above?
20. Iron is present in the earth’s crust in many types of minerals. The
iron oxide minerals are hematite (Fe2O3) and magnetite (Fe3O4).
What is the oxidation state of iron in each mineral? The iron ions
in magnetite are a mixture of Fe2 and Fe3 ions. What is the ratio
of Fe3 to Fe2 ions in magnetite? The formula for magnetite is
usually written as FeO  Fe2O3. Does this make sense? Explain.
21. What is the lanthanide contraction? How does the lanthanide contraction affect the properties of the 4d and 5d transition metals?
22. We expect the atomic radius to increase down a group in the periodic table. Can you suggest why the atomic radius of hafnium
breaks this rule? (See the following data.)
Element

Atomic
Radius (Å)

Element

Atomic
Radius (Å)

Sc
Y
La

1.57
1.693
1.915

Ti
Zr
Hf

1.477
1.593
1.476

Transition Metals and Coordination Compounds
13. Write electron conﬁgurations for the following metals.
a. Ni
b. Cd
c. Zr
d. Os
14. Write electron conﬁgurations for the following ions.
a. Ni2
c. Zr3 and Zr4
2
b. Cd
d. Os2 and Os3
15. Write electron conﬁgurations for each of the following.
a. Ti, Ti2, Ti4
b. Re, Re2, Re3
c. Ir, Ir2, Ir3

23. Novelty devices for predicting rain contain cobalt(II) chloride and
are based on the following equilibrium:
CoCl2 1s2  6H2O1g2 ∆ CoCl2  6H2O1s2
Purple

Pink

What color will such an indicator be if rain is imminent?
24. Chromium(VI) forms two different oxyanions, the orange dichromate ion, Cr2O72, and the yellow chromate ion, CrO42. The equilibrium reaction between the two ions is
Cr2O72 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ 2CrO42 1aq2  2H 1aq2

Exercises
The following pictures show what happens when sodium hydroxide is added to a dichromate solution.

Explain what happened.
25. A series of chemicals was added to some AgNO3(aq). NaCl(aq)
was added ﬁrst to the silver nitrate solution with the end result
shown below in test tube 1, NH3(aq) was then added with the end
result shown in test tube 2, and HNO3(aq) was added last with
the end result shown in test tube 3.

1

2

3

Explain the results shown in each test tube. Include a balanced
equation for the reaction(s) taking place.
26. When an aqueous solution of KCN is added to a solution containing Ni2 ions, a precipitate forms, which redissolves on addition of more KCN solution. Write reactions describing what
happens in this solution. (Hint: CN is a Brønsted–Lowry base
[ Kb  105 ] and a Lewis base.)
27. Consider aqueous solutions of the following coordination compounds: Co(NH3)6I3, Pt(NH3)4I4, Na2PtI6, and Cr(NH3)4I3. If aqueous AgNO3 is added to separate beakers containing solutions of
each coordination compound, how many moles of AgI will precipitate per mole of transition metal present? Assume that each
transition metal ion forms an octahedral complex.
28. A coordination compound of cobalt(III) contains four ammonia
molecules, one sulfate ion, and one chloride ion. Addition of aqueous BaCl2 solution to an aqueous solution of the compound gives
no precipitate. Addition of aqueous AgNO3 to an aqueous solution of the compound produces a white precipitate. Propose a
structure for this coordination compound.
29. Name the following
a. Ru(NH3)5Cl2
b. Fe(CN)64
30. Name the following
a. Ni(CN)42
b. Cr(NH3)4Cl2

complex ions.
c. Mn(NH2CH2CH2NH2)32
d. Co(NH3)5NO22
complex ions.
c. Fe(C2O4)33
d. Co(SCN)2(H2O)4

991

31. Name the following coordination compounds.
a. [Co(NH3)6]Cl2
d. K4[PtCl6]
b. [Co(H2O)6]I3
e. [Co(NH3)5Cl]Cl2
c. K2[PtCl4]
f. [Co(NH3)3(NO2)3]
32. Name the following coordination compounds.
a. [Cr(H2O)5Br]Br2
c. [Fe(NH2CH2CH2NH2)2(NO2)2]Cl
b. Na3[Co(CN)6]
d. [Pt(NH3)4I2][PtI4]
33. Give formulas for the following.
a. potassium tetrachlorocobaltate(II)
b. aquatricarbonylplatinum(II) bromide
c. sodium dicyanobis(oxalato)ferrate(III)
d. triamminechloroethylenediaminechromium(III) iodide
34. Give formulas for the following complex ions.
a. tetrachloroferrate(III) ion
b. pentaammineaquaruthenium(III) ion
c. tetracarbonyldihydroxochromium(III) ion
d. amminetrichloroplatinate(II) ion
35. Draw geometrical isomers of each of the following complex ions.
a. [Co(C2O4)2(H2O)2]
c. [Ir(NH3)3Cl3]
b. [Pt(NH3)4I2]2
d. [Cr(en)(NH3)2I2]
36. Draw structures of each of the following.
a. cis-dichloroethylenediamineplatinum(II)
b. trans-dichlorobis(ethylenediamine)cobalt(II)
c. cis-tetraamminechloronitrocobalt(III) ion
d. trans-tetraamminechloronitritocobalt(III) ion
e. trans-diaquabis(ethylenediamine)copper(II) ion
37. Amino acids can act as ligands toward transition metal ions. The
simplest amino acid is glycine (NH2CH2CO2H). Draw a structure
of the glycinate anion (NH2CH2CO2 ) acting as a bidentate ligand. Draw the structural isomers of the square planar complex
Cu(NH2CH2CO2)2.
38. BAL is a chelating agent used in treating heavy metal poisoning.
It acts as a bidentate ligand. What type of linkage isomers are possible when BAL coordinates to a metal ion?
CH2 OSH
A
CH OSH
A
CH2 O OH
BAL

39. Which of the following ligands are capable of linkage isomerism?
Explain your answer.
SCN, N3, NO2, NH2CH2CH2NH2, OCN, I
40. Draw all geometrical and linkage isomers of Co(NH3)4(NO2)2.
41. Acetylacetone, abbreviated acacH, is a bidentate ligand. It loses
a proton and coordinates as acac, as shown below, where M is
a transition metal:
CH3
D
D
G
M
CH
G
J
OO C
G
CH3
OPC

992

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

Which of the following complexes are optically active: cisCr(acac)2(H2O)2, trans-Cr(acac)2(H2O)2, and Cr(acac)3?
42. Draw all geometrical isomers of Pt(CN)2Br2(H2O)2. Which of
these isomers has an optical isomer? Draw the various optical
isomers.

Bonding, Color, and Magnetism in
Coordination Compounds
43. Draw the d-orbital splitting diagrams for the octahedral complex
ions of each of the following.
a. Fe2 (high and low spin)
b. Fe3 (high spin)
c. Ni2
44. Draw the d-orbital splitting diagrams for the octahedral complex
ions of each of the following.
a. Zn2
b. Co2 (high and low spin)
c. Ti3
45. The CrF64 ion is known to have four unpaired electrons. Does
the F ligand produce a strong or weak ﬁeld?
46. The Co(NH3)63 ion is diamagnetic, but Fe(H2O)62 is paramagnetic. Explain.
47. How many unpaired electrons are in the following complex ions?
a. Ru(NH3)62 (low-spin case)
b. Ni(H2O)62
c. V(en)33
48. The complex ion Fe1CN2 63 is paramagnetic with one unpaired
electron. The complex ion Fe1SCN2 63 has ﬁve unpaired electrons.
Where does SCN lie in the spectrochemical series relative to CN?
49. Rank the following complex ions in order of increasing wavelength of light absorbed.
3 Co1H2O2 6 4 , 3Co1CN2 6 4 , 3Co1I6 2 4 , 3Co1en2 3 4
3

3

3

3

2

50. The complex ion [Cu(H2O) 6 ] has an absorption maximum
at around 800 nm. When four ammonias replace water,
[Cu(NH3)4(H2O)2]2, the absorption maximum shifts to around
600 nm. What do these results signify in terms of the relative ﬁeld
splittings of NH3 and H2O? Explain.
51. The following test tubes each contain a different chromium complex ion.

For each compound, predict the predominant color of light absorbed. If the complex ions are Cr(NH3)63, Cr(H2O)63, and
Cr(H2O)4Cl2, what is the identity of the complex ion in each test
tube? Hint: Reference the spectrochemical series.
52. Consider the complex ions Co(NH3)63, Co(CN)63, and CoF63.
The wavelengths of absorbed electromagnetic radiation for these
compounds (in no speciﬁc order) are 770 nm, 440 nm, and 290 nm.
Match the complex ion to the wavelength of absorbed electromagnetic radiation.
53. The wavelength of absorbed electromagnetic radiation for CoBr42
is 3.4  106 m. Will the complex ion CoBr64 absorb electromagnetic radiation having a wavelength longer or shorter than
3.4  106 m? Explain.
54. Tetrahedral complexes of Co2 are quite common. Use a d-orbital
splitting diagram to rationalize the stability of Co2 tetrahedral
complex ions.
55. How many unpaired electrons are present in the tetrahedral ion
FeCl4?
56. The complex ion PdCl42 is diamagnetic. Propose a structure for
PdCl42.

Metallurgy
57. A blast furnace is used to reduce iron oxides to elemental iron.
The reducing agent for this reduction process is carbon monoxide.
a. Given the following data:
Fe2O3 1s2  3CO1g2 ¡ 2Fe1s2  3CO2 1g2

3Fe2O3 1s2  CO1g2 ¡ 2Fe3O4 1s2  CO2 1g2
Fe3O4 1s2  CO1g2 ¡ 3FeO1s2  CO2 1g2

¢H°  23 kJ
¢H°  39 kJ
¢H°  18 kJ

determine H for the reaction
FeO1s2  CO1g2 ¡ Fe1s2  CO2 1g2
b. The CO2 produced in a blast furnace during the reduction
process actually can oxidize iron into FeO. To eliminate this
reaction, excess coke is added to convert CO2 into CO by the
reaction
CO2 1g2  C1s2 ¡ 2CO1g2
Using data from Appendix 4, determine ¢H° and ¢S° for this
reaction. Assuming ¢H° and ¢S° do not depend on temperature, at what temperature is the conversion reaction of CO2 into
CO spontaneous at standard conditions?
58. What roles do kinetics and thermodynamics play in the effect that
the following reaction has on the properties of steel?
3Fe  C ∆ Fe3C
59. Silver is sometimes found in nature as large nuggets; more often
it is found mixed with other metals and their ores. Cyanide ion is
often used to extract the silver by the following reaction that occurs
in basic solution:
Ag1s2  CN 1aq2  O2 1g2 ¡ Ag1CN2 2 1aq2
Basic

Balance this equation by using the half-reaction method.

Additional Exercises
60. One of the classic methods for the determination of the manganese
content in steel involves converting all the manganese to the
deeply colored permanganate ion and then measuring the absorption of light. The steel is ﬁrst dissolved in nitric acid, producing
the manganese(II) ion and nitrogen dioxide gas. This solution is
then reacted with an acidic solution containing periodate ion; the
products are the permanganate and iodate ions. Write balanced
chemical equations for both of these steps.

Additional Exercises
61. Ammonia and potassium iodide solutions are added to an aqueous solution of Cr(NO3)3. A solid is isolated (compound A), and
the following data are collected:
i. When 0.105 g of compound A was strongly heated in excess
O2, 0.0203 g of CrO3 was formed.
ii. In a second experiment it took 32.93 mL of 0.100 M HCl to
titrate completely the NH3 present in 0.341 g of compound A.
iii. Compound A was found to contain 73.53% iodine by mass.
iv. The freezing point of water was lowered by 0.64ºC when 0.601
g of compound A was dissolved in 10.00 g of H2O (Kf 
1.86°C  kg/mol).
What is the formula of the compound? What is the structure of
the complex ion present? (Hints: Cr3 is expected to be sixcoordinate, with NH3 and possibly I as ligands. The I ions will
be the counterions if needed.)
62. A transition metal compound contains a cobalt ion, chloride ions,
and water molecules. The H2O molecules are the ligands in the
complex ion and the Cl ions are the counterions. A 0.256-g
sample of the compound was dissolved in water, and excess silver
nitrate was added. The silver chloride was ﬁltered, dried, and
weighed, and it had a mass of 0.308 g. A second sample of 0.416 g
of the compound was dissolved in water, and an excess of sodium
hydroxide was added. The hydroxide salt was ﬁltered and heated
in a ﬂame, forming cobalt(III) oxide. The mass of cobalt(III) oxide
formed was 0.145 g. What is the oxidation state of cobalt in the
complex ion and what is the formula of the compound?
63. When aqueous KI is added gradually to mercury(II) nitrate, an orange precipitate forms. Continued addition of KI causes the
precipitate to dissolve. Write balanced equations to explain these
observations. (Hint: Hg2 reacts with I to form HgI42. Would
you expect HgI42 to form colored solutions? Explain.
64. In the production of printed circuit boards for the electronics industry, a 0.60-mm layer of copper is laminated onto an insulating
plastic board. Next, a circuit pattern made of a chemically resistant polymer is printed on the board. The unwanted copper is removed by chemical etching, and the protective polymer is ﬁnally
removed by solvents. One etching reaction is
3 Cu1NH3 2 4 4 Cl2 1aq2  4NH3 1aq2  Cu1s2
¡ 2 3Cu1NH3 2 4 4Cl1aq2

a. Is this reaction an oxidation–reduction process? Explain.
b. A plant needs to manufacture 10,000 printed circuit boards,
each 8.0  16.0 cm in area. An average of 80.% of the copper is removed from each board (density of copper  8.96
g/cm3). What masses of [Cu(NH3)4]Cl2 and NH3 are needed to
do this? Assume 100% yield.
65. How many bonds could each of the following chelates form with
a metal ion?

993

a. acetylacetone(acacH)
O

O

B

B

CH3OCO CH2OC OCH 3
b. diethylenetriamine
NH2¬CH2¬CH2¬NH¬CH2¬CH2¬NH2
c. salen
N

N

OH

HO

NH

N

d. porphine

N

HN

66. Until the discoveries of Werner, it was thought that carbon had to
be present in a compound for it to be optically active. Werner prepared the following compound containing OH ions as bridging
groups and separated the optical isomers.
a. Draw structures of the two optically active isomers of this
compound.
b. What are the oxidation states of the cobalt ions?
c. How many unpaired electrons are present if the complex is the
low-spin case?
H

A

O
Co
O

G
Co( NH3 )4
D

Cl 6

A

H

3

67. The complex ion Ru(phen)32 has been used as a probe for the
structure of DNA. (Phen is a bidentate ligand.)
a. What type of isomerism is found in Ru(phen)32?
b. Ru(phen)32 is diamagnetic (as are all complex ions of Ru2).
Draw the crystal ﬁeld diagram for the d orbitals in this complex ion.

Phen  1,10-phenanthroline 
N

N

994

Chapter Twenty-One

Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry

68. A compound related to acetylacetone is 1,1,1-triﬂuoroacetylacetone (abbreviated Htfa):
O

73. Carbon monoxide is toxic because it binds more strongly to iron
in hemoglobin (Hb) than does O2. Consider the following reactions and approximate standard free energy changes:

O

CF3CCH2CCH3
Htfa forms complexes in a manner similar to acetylacetone. (See
Exercise 41.) Both Be2 and Cu2 form complexes with tfa having the formula M(tfa)2. Two isomers are formed for each metal
complex.
a. The Be2 complexes are tetrahedral. Draw the two isomers of
Be(tfa)2. What type of isomerism is exhibited by Be(tfa)2?
b. The Cu2 complexes are square planar. Draw the two isomers
of Cu(tfa)2. What type of isomerism is exhibited by Cu(tfa)2?
69. Would it be better to use octahedral Ni2 complexes or octahedral Cr2 complexes to determine whether a given ligand is a
strong-ﬁeld or weak-ﬁeld ligand by measuring the number of unpaired electrons? How else could the relative ligand ﬁeld strengths
be determined?
70. The equilibrium constant, Ka, for the reaction
Fe1H2O2 63 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆
Fe1H2O2 5 1OH2 2 1aq2  H3O 1aq2
is 6.0  103.
a. Calculate the pH of a 0.10 M solution of Fe(H2O)63.
b. Will a 1.0 M solution of iron(II) nitrate have a higher or lower
pH than a 1.0 M solution of iron(III) nitrate? Explain.
71. Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA4 ) is used as a complexing
agent in chemical analysis with the structure shown in Figure 21.7.
Solutions of EDTA4 are used to treat heavy metal poisoning by
removing the heavy metal in the form of a soluble complex ion.
The complex ion virtually eliminates the heavy metal ions from
reacting with biochemical systems. The reaction of EDTA4 with
Pb2 is
Pb2 1aq2  EDTA4 1aq2 ∆ PbEDTA2 1aq2

K  1.1  1018

Consider a solution with 0.010 mol Pb(NO3)2 added to 1.0 L of
an aqueous solution buffered at pH  13.00 and containing 0.050
M Na4EDTA. Does Pb(OH)2 precipitate from this solution? (Ksp
for Pb(OH)2  1.2  1015.)
72. Hemoglobin (abbreviated Hb) is a protein that is responsible for
the transport of oxygen in the blood of mammals. Each hemoglobin molecule contains four iron atoms that serve as the binding sites for O2 molecules. The oxygen binding is pH dependent.
The relevant equilibrium reaction is
HbH44 1aq2  4O2 1g2 ∆ Hb1O2 2 4 1aq2  4H 1aq2
Use Le Châtelier’s principle to answer the following.
4
a. What form of hemoglobin, HbH4 or Hb(O2)4, is favored in
the lungs? What form is favored in the cells?
b. When a person hyperventilates, the concentration of CO2 in
the blood decreases. How does this affect the oxygen-binding
equilibrium? How does breathing into a paper bag help to counteract this effect?
c. When a person has suffered a cardiac arrest, an injection of
a sodium bicarbonate solution is given. Why is this step
necessary?

Hb  O2 ¡ HbO2

¢G°  70 kJ

Hb  CO ¡ HbCO

¢G°  80 kJ

Using these data, estimate the equilibrium constant value at 25C
for the following reaction:
HbO2  CO ∆ HbCO  O2
74. For the process
Co1NH3 2 5Cl2  Cl ¡ Co1NH3 2 4Cl2  NH3
what would be the expected ratio of cis to trans isomers in the
product?

Challenge Problems
75. The complex trans-[NiA2B4]2, where A and B represent neutral
ligands, is known to be diamagnetic. Do A and B produce very
similar or very different crystal ﬁelds? Explain.
76. Impure nickel, reﬁned by smelting sulﬁde ores in a blast furnace,
can be converted into metal from 99.90% to 99.99% purity by
the Mond process. The primary reaction involved in the Mond
process is
Ni1s2  4CO1g2 ∆ Ni1CO2 4 1g2
a. Without referring to Appendix 4, predict the sign of S for
the preceding reaction. Explain.
b. The spontaneity of the preceding reaction is temperature dependent. Predict the sign of Ssurr for this reaction. Explain.
c. For Ni(CO)4(g), H f  607 kJ/mol and S  417 J/K  mol
at 298 K. Using these values and data in Appendix 4, calculate H and S  for the preceding reaction.
d. Calculate the temperature at which G  0 (K  1) for the
preceding reaction, assuming that H and S do not depend
on temperature.
e. The ﬁrst step of the Mond process involves equilibrating impure nickel with CO(g) and Ni(CO)4(g) at about 50C. The
purpose of this step is to convert as much nickel as possible
into the gas phase. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the
preceding reaction at 50.C.
f. In the second step of the Mond process, the gaseous Ni(CO)4
is isolated and heated at 227C. The purpose of this step is to
deposit as much nickel as possible as pure solid (the reverse
of the preceding reaction). Calculate the equilibrium constant
for the above reaction at 227C.
g. Why is temperature increased for the second step of the Mond
process?
77. Consider the following data:
Co3  e ¡ Co2

e°  1.82 V
2

K  1.5  1012

Co3  3en ¡ Co1en2 33

K  2.0  1047

2

Co

 3en ¡ Co1en2 3

where en  ethylenediamine.
a. Calculate e for the half-reaction
Co1en2 33  e ¡ Co1en2 32

Marathon Problem
b. Based on your answer to part a, which is the stronger
oxidizing agent, Co3 or Co(en)33?
c. Use the crystal ﬁeld model to rationalize the result in part b.
78. Henry Taube, 1983 Nobel Prize winner in chemistry, has studied
the mechanisms of the oxidation–reduction reactions of transition
metal complexes. In one experiment he and his students studied
the following reaction:
Cr1H2O2 62 1aq2  Co1NH3 2 5Cl2 1aq2
¡ Cr1III2 complexes  Co1II2 complexes
Chromium(III) and cobalt(III) complexes are substitutionally inert
(no exchange of ligands) under conditions of the experiment.
Chromium(II) and cobalt(II) complexes can exchange ligands very
rapidly. One of the products of the reaction is Cr(H2O)5Cl2. Is this
consistent with the reaction proceeding through formation of
(H2O)5CrOClOCo(NH3)5 as an intermediate? Explain.
79. Chelating ligands often form more stable complex ions than the
corresponding monodentate ligands with the same donor atoms.
For example,
Ni2 1aq2  6NH3 1aq2 ∆ Ni1NH3 2 62 1aq2
2

Ni

1aq2  3en1aq2 ∆ Ni1en2 3

2

1aq2

Ni2 1aq2  penten 1aq2 ∆ Ni1penten2 2 1aq2

K  3.2  108
K  1.6  1018
K  2.0  1019

where en is ethylenediamine and penten is
NH2CH2CH2

G
D
NOCH2OCH2ON
D
G
NH2CH2CH2

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

CH2CH2NH2
CH2CH2NH2

This increased stability is called the chelate effect. Based on bond
energies, would you expect the enthalpy changes for the above
reactions to be very different? What is the order (from least favorable to most favorable) of the entropy changes for the above
reactions? How do the values of the formation constants correlate
with S? How can this be used to explain the chelate effect?
Qualitatively draw the crystal ﬁeld splitting of the d orbitals in a
trigonal planar complex ion. (Let the z axis be perpendicular to
the plane of the complex.)
Qualitatively draw the crystal ﬁeld splitting for a trigonal bipyramidal complex ion. (Let the z axis be perpendicular to the
trigonal plane.)
Sketch a d-orbital energy diagram for the following.
a. a linear complex with ligands on the x axis
b. a linear complex with ligands on the y axis
Sketch and explain the most likely pattern for the crystal ﬁeld diagram for the complex ion trans-diamminetetracyanonickelate(II),
where CN produces a much stronger crystal ﬁeld than NH3. Explain completely and label the d orbitals in your diagram. Assume
the NH3 ligands lie on the axis.
a. Calculate the molar solubility of AgBr in pure water. Ksp for
AgBr is 5.0  1013.
b. Calculate the molar solubility of AgBr in 3.0 M NH3. The overall formation constant for Ag(NH3)2 is 1.7  107, that is,

Ag 1aq2  2NH3 1aq2 ¡ Ag1NH3 2 2 1aq2

K  1.7  107.

c. Compare the calculated solubilities from parts a and b. Explain
any differences.

995

d. What mass of AgBr will dissolve in 250.0 mL of 3.0 M NH3?
e. What effect does adding HNO3 have on the solubilities calculated in parts a and b?

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

85. The ferrate ion, FeO42, is such a powerful oxidizing agent that
in acidic solution, aqueous ammonia is reduced to elemental nitrogen along with the formation of the iron(III) ion.
a. What is the oxidation state of iron in FeO42, and what is the
electron conﬁguration of iron in this polyatomic ion?
b. If 25.0 mL of a 0.243 M FeO42 solution is allowed to react
with 55.0 mL of 1.45 M aqueous ammonia, what volume of
nitrogen gas can form at 25°C and 1.50 atm?
86. a. In the absorption spectrum of the complex ion [Cr(NCS) 6 ] 3,
there is a band corresponding to the absorption of a photon of
light with an energy of 1.75  104 cm1. Given 1 cm1 
23
1.986  10 J, what is the wavelength of this photon?
b. The Cr¬N¬C bond angle in [Cr(NCS) 6 ] 3 is predicted to
be 180°. What is the hybridization of the N atom in the NCS
ligand when a Lewis acid–base reaction occurs between Cr3
and NCS that would give a 180° Cr¬N¬C bond angle?
[Cr(NCS) 6 ] 3 undergoes substitution by ethylenediammine
(en) according to the equation
3Cr1NCS2 6 4 3  2en ¡ 3Cr1NCS2 2 1en2 2 4   4NCS
Does [Cr(NCS)2(en)2] exhibit geometric isomerism? Does
[Cr(NCS)2(en)2] exhibit optical isomerism?

Marathon Problem
This problem is designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

87. There are three salts that contain complex ions of chromium and
have the molecular formula CrCl3  6H2O. Treating 0.27 g of the
ﬁrst salt with a strong dehydrating agent resulted in a mass loss
of 0.036 g. Treating 270 mg of the second salt with the same dehydrating agent resulted in a mass loss of 18 mg. The third salt
did not lose any mass when treated with the same dehydrating
agent. Addition of excess aqueous silver nitrate to 100.0-mL portions of 0.100 M solutions of each salt resulted in the formation
of different masses of silver chloride; one solution yielded 1430
mg AgCl; another, 2870 mg AgCl; the third, 4300 mg AgCl. Two
of the salts are green and one is violet.
Suggest probable structural formulas for these salts, defending your answer on the basis of the preceding observations. State
which salt is most likely to be violet. Would a study of the magnetic properties of the salts be helpful in determining the structural formulas? Explain.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

22

Organic and Biological
Molecules

Contents
22.1 Alkanes: Saturated
Hydrocarbons
• Isomerism in Alkanes
• Nomenclature
• Reactions of Alkanes
• Cyclic Alkanes
22.2 Alkenes and Alkynes
• Reactions of Alkenes and
Alkynes
22.3 Aromatic Hydrocarbons
22.4 Hydrocarbon Derivatives
• Alcohols
• Aldehydes and Ketones
• Carboxylic Acids and Esters
• Amines
22.5 Polymers
• The Development and
Properties of Polymers
• Types of Polymers
• Polymers Based on Ethylene
22.6 Natural Polymers
• Proteins
• Carbohydrates
• Nucleic Acids

Polarized light micrograph of crystals of phenylalanine, one of the essential amino acids that the
body cannot synthesize.

996

T

wo Group 4A elements, carbon and silicon, form the basis of most natural substances.
Silicon, with its great afﬁnity for oxygen, forms chains and rings containing Si¬O¬Si
bridges to produce the silica and silicates that form the basis for most rocks, sands, and
soils. What silicon is to the geological world, carbon is to the biological world. Carbon
has the unusual ability of bonding strongly to itself to form long chains or rings of carbon
atoms. In addition, carbon forms strong bonds to other nonmetals such as hydrogen,
nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and the halogens. Because of these bonding properties, there are
a myriad of carbon compounds; several million are now known, and the number continues
to grow rapidly. Among these many compounds are the biomolecules, those responsible
for maintaining and reproducing life.
The study of carbon-containing compounds and their properties is called organic
chemistry. Although a few compounds involving carbon, such as its oxides and carbonates, are considered to be inorganic substances, the vast majority are organic compounds
that typically contain chains or rings of carbon atoms.
Originally, the distinction between inorganic and organic substances was based on
whether a compound was produced by living systems. For example, until the early nineteenth century it was believed that organic compounds had some sort of “life force” and
could be synthesized only by living organisms. This view was dispelled in 1828 when the
German chemist Friedrich Wöhler (1800–1882) prepared urea from the inorganic salt
ammonium cyanate by simple heating:
NH4OCN
Ammonium cyanate

Heat

H2NO C ONH2
B
O
Urea

Urea is a component of urine, so it is clearly an organic material; yet here was clear
evidence that it could be produced in the laboratory as well as by living things.
Organic chemistry plays a vital role in our quest to understand living systems. Beyond
that, the synthetic ﬁbers, plastics, artiﬁcial sweeteners, and drugs that are such an accepted
part of modern life are products of industrial organic chemistry. In addition, the energy
on which we rely so heavily to power our civilization is based mostly on the organic
materials found in coal and petroleum.
Because organic chemistry is such a vast subject, we can provide only a brief introduction to it in this book. We will begin with the simplest class of organic compounds,
the hydrocarbons, and then show how most other organic compounds can be considered
to be derivatives of hydrocarbons.

22.1

Alkanes: Saturated Hydrocarbons

As the name indicates, hydrocarbons are compounds composed of carbon and hydrogen.
Those compounds whose carbon–carbon bonds are all single bonds are said to be
saturated, because each carbon is bound to four atoms, the maximum number. Hydrocarbons containing carbon–carbon multiple bonds are described as being unsaturated,

997

998

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules
since the carbon atoms involved in a multiple bond can react with additional atoms, as
shown by the addition of hydrogen to ethylene:
H H
H
H
A A
G
D
 H2
CPC
HO COC OH
D
G
A A
H
H
H H

H1s

H1s

sp3

sp3

sp3

sp3

H1s

FIGURE 22.1
The COH bonds in methane.

H

H

H

C

C

H

H

Unsaturated

H1s

C

H

(a)

Saturated

Note that each carbon in ethylene is bonded to three atoms (one carbon and two hydrogens) but that each can bond to one additional atom if one bond of the carbon–carbon
double bond is broken.
The simplest member of the saturated hydrocarbons, which are also called the alkanes,
is methane (CH4). As discussed in Section 9.1, methane has a tetrahedral structure and
can be described in terms of a carbon atom using an sp3 hybrid set of orbitals to bond to
the four hydrogen atoms (see Fig. 22.1). The next alkane, the one containing two carbon
atoms, is ethane (C2H6), as shown in Fig. 22.2. Each carbon in ethane is surrounded by
four atoms and thus adopts a tetrahedral arrangement and sp3 hybridization, as predicted
by the localized electron model.
The next two members of the series are propane (C3H8) and butane (C4H10), shown
in Fig. 22.3. Again, each carbon is bonded to four atoms and is described as sp3 hybridized.
Alkanes in which the carbon atoms form long “strings” or chains are called normal,
straight-chain, or unbranched hydrocarbons. As can be seen from Fig. 22.3, the chains
in normal alkanes are not really straight but zig-zag, since the tetrahedral COCOC angle
is 109.5. The normal alkanes can be represented by the structure

where n is an integer. Note that each member is obtained from the previous one by inserting a methylene (CH2) group. We can condense the structural formulas by omitting
some of the COH bonds. For example, the general formula for normal alkanes shown
above can be condensed to
CH3 ¬1 CH2¬CH
2n
3
(b)

FIGURE 22.2
(a) The Lewis structure of ethane (C2H6).
(b) The molecular structure of ethane represented by space-ﬁlling and ball-and-stick
models.

The ﬁrst ten normal alkanes and some of their properties are listed in Table 22.1. Note
that all alkanes can be represented by the general formula CnH2n  2. For example, nonane,
which has nine carbon atoms, is represented by C9H(2  9)  2, or C9H20. Also note from
Table 22.1 that the melting points and boiling points increase as the molar masses increase, as we would expect.

Isomerism in Alkanes
Butane and all succeeding members of the alkanes exhibit structural isomerism. Recall
from Section 21.4 that structural isomerism occurs when two molecules have the same atoms

FIGURE 22.3
The structures of (a) propane (CH3CH2CH3)
and (b) butane (CH3CH2CH2CH3). Each
angle shown in red is 109.5°.

(a)

(b)

999

22.1 Alkanes: Saturated Hydrocarbons

TABLE 22.1

Name
Methane
Ethane
Propane
Butane
Pentane
Hexane
Heptane
Octane
Nonane
Decane

Selected Properties of the First Ten Normal Alkanes

Formula

Molar Mass

Melting
Point (°C)

CH4
C2H6
C3H8
C4H10
C5H12
C6H14
C7H16
C8H18
C9H20
C10H22

16
30
44
58
72
86
100
114
128
142

182
183
187
138
130
95
91
57
54
30

Boiling
Point (°C)

Number of
Structural
Isomers

162
89
42
0
36
68
98
126
151
174

1
1
1
2
3
5
9
18
35
75

(a)

FIGURE 22.4
(a) Normal butane (abbreviated n-butane).
(b) The branched isomer of butane (called
isobutane).

(b)

but different bonds. For example, butane can exist as a straight-chain molecule (normal
butane, or n-butane) or with a branched-chain structure (called isobutane), as shown in
Fig. 22.4. Because of their different structures, these molecules exhibit different properties.
For example, the boiling point of n-butane is 0.5C, whereas that of isobutane is 12C.
Sample Exercise 22.1

Structural Isomerism
Draw the isomers of pentane.
Solution
Pentane (C5H12) has the following isomeric structures:
1.

CH3

CH2

CH2
n-Pentane

CH2

CH3

1000

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules
2.

CH3
CH3

CH

CH2

CH3

Isopentane

3.

CH3
CH3

C

CH3

CH3
Neopentane

Note that the structures

TABLE 22.2 The Most Common
Alkyl Substituents and Their
Names
Structure*

Name†

OCH3
OCH2CH3
OCH2CH2CH3
A
CH3CHCH3

Methyl
Ethyl
Propyl

OCH2CH2CH2CH3
A
CH3CHCH2CH3

Butyl

which might appear to be other isomers, are actually identical to structure 2.
See Exercise 22.13.

Nomenclature
Because there are literally millions of organic compounds, it would be impossible to remember common names for all of them. We must have a systematic method for naming
them. The following rules are used in naming alkanes.

Isopropyl

sec-Butyl

Rules for Naming Alkanes

1. The names of the alkanes beyond butane are obtained by adding the sufﬁx -ane to

H
A
O CH2O CO CH3
A
CH3

Isobutyl

CH3
A
O CO CH3
A
CH3

tert-Butyl

*The bond with one end open shows the
point of attachment of the substituent to the
carbon chain.
†For the butyl groups, sec- indicates attachment to the chain through a secondary carbon, a carbon atom attached to two other
carbon atoms. The designation tert- signiﬁes attachment through a tertiary carbon, a
carbon attached to three other carbon
atoms.

the Greek root for the number of carbon atoms (pent- for ﬁve, hex- for six, and so
on). For a branched hydrocarbon, the longest continuous chain of carbon atoms
determines the root name for the hydrocarbon. For example, in the alkane
CH3
A
CH2
Six carbons
A
CH2
A
CH3O CH2OCH O CH2OCH3
the longest chain contains six carbon atoms, and this compound is named as a hexane.

2. When alkane groups appear as substituents, they are named by dropping the -ane
and adding -yl. For example, OCH3 is obtained by removing a hydrogen from
methane and is called methyl, OC2H5 is called ethyl, OC3H7 is called propyl, and so
on. The compound above is therefore an ethylhexane. (See Table 22.2.)

22.1 Alkanes: Saturated Hydrocarbons

1001

3. The positions of substituent groups are speciﬁed by numbering the longest chain of
carbon atoms sequentially, starting at the end closest to the branching. For example,
the compound
CH3
A
CH3O CH2OCH O CH2OCH2OCH3
1

2

3

4

5

6

Correct numbering

6

5

4

3

2

1

Incorrect numbering

is called 3-methylhexane. Note that the top set of numbers is correct since the left
end of the molecule is closest to the branching, and this gives the smallest number
for the position of the substituent. Also, note that a hyphen is written between the
number and the substituent name.

4. The location and name of each substituent are followed by the root alkane name.
The substituents are listed in alphabetical order, and the preﬁxes di-, tri-, and so on,
are used to indicate multiple, identical substituents.

Sample Exercise 22.2

Isomerism and Nomenclature
Draw the structural isomers for the alkane C6H14 and give the systematic name for each one.
Solution
We will proceed systematically, starting with the longest chain and then rearranging the
carbons to form the shorter, branched chains.
1. CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3

Hexane

Note that although a structure such as
CH3
A
CH2CH2CH2CH2
A
CH3
Six carbon atoms
may look different it is still hexane, since the longest carbon chain has six atoms.
2. We now take one carbon out of the chain and make it a methyl substituent.
1

2

3

4

5

CH3CHCH2CH2CH3
A
CH3

2-Methylpentane

Since the longest chain consists of ﬁve carbons, this is a substituted pentane:
2-methylpentane. The 2 indicates the position of the methyl group on the chain. Note that
if we numbered the chain from the right end, the methyl group would be on carbon 4.
Because we want the smallest possible number, the numbering shown is correct.
3. The methyl substituent can also be on carbon 3 to give
1

2

3

4

5

CH3CH2CHCH2CH3
A
CH3

3-Methylpentane

Note that we have now exhausted all possibilities for placing a single methyl group on
pentane.

1002

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules
4. Next, we can take two carbons out of the original six-member chain:
1

2

3

4

CH3CHOCHCH3
A
A
CH3 CH3

2,3-Dimethylbutane

Since the longest chain now has four carbons, the root name is butane. Since there
are two methyl groups, we use the preﬁx di-. The numbers denote that the two methyl
groups are positioned on the second and third carbons in the butane chain. Note that
when two or more numbers are used, they are separated by a comma.
5. The two methyl groups can also be attached to the same carbon atom as shown here:
CH3

2A

1

3

4

CH3O C O CH2CH3
A
CH3

2,2-Dimethylbutane

We might also try ethyl-substituted butanes, such as
CH3O CHCH2CH3
A
CH2
Pentane
A
CH3
However, note that this is instead a pentane (3-methylpentane), since the longest chain
has ﬁve carbon atoms. Thus it is not a new isomer. Trying to reduce the chain to three
atoms provides no further isomers either. For example, the structure
CH3
A
CH3OC OCH3
A
CH2
A
CH3
is actually 2,2-dimethylbutane.
Thus there are only ﬁve distinct structural isomers of C6H14: hexane, 2-methylpentane,
3-methylpentane, 2,3-dimethylbutane, and 2,2-dimethylbutane.
See Exercises 22.15 and 22.16.

Sample Exercise 22.3

Structures from Names
Determine the structure for each of the following compounds.
a. 4-ethyl-3,5-dimethylnonane

b. 4-tert-butylheptane

Solution
a. The root name nonane signiﬁes a nine-carbon chain. Thus we have
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

CH3CH2CHOCHOCHCH2CH2CH2CH3
A
A
A
CH3 CH2 CH3
A
CH3

22.1 Alkanes: Saturated Hydrocarbons

1003

b. Heptane signiﬁes a seven-carbon chain, and the tert-butyl group is
A
H3COCOCH3
A
CH3
Thus we have
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3
A
H3COCO CH3
A
CH3
See Exercises 22.19 and 22.20.

Reactions of Alkanes
Because they are saturated compounds and because the C¬C and C¬H bonds are relatively strong, the alkanes are fairly unreactive. For example, at 25°C they do not react
with acids, bases, or strong oxidizing agents. This chemical inertness makes them valuable as lubricating materials and as the backbone for structural materials such as plastics.
At a sufﬁciently high temperature alkanes do react vigorously and exothermically
with oxygen, and these combustion reactions are the basis for their widespread use as
fuels. For example, the reaction of butane with oxygen is
2C4H10 1g2  13O2 1g2 ¡ 8CO2 1g2  10H2O1g2
The alkanes can also undergo substitution reactions, primarily where halogen atoms
replace hydrogen atoms. For example, methane can be successively chlorinated as follows:
hv

CH4  Cl2 ¡

CH3Cl

 HCl

Chloromethane

The hv above the arrow represents
ultraviolet light.

hv

CH3Cl  Cl2 ¡

CH2Cl2

 HCl

Dichloromethane
hv

CH2Cl2  Cl2 ¡

CHCl3

 HCl

Trichloromethane
(chloroform)
hv

CHCl3  Cl2 ¡

CCl4

 HCl

Tetrachloromethane
(carbon tetrachloride)

Note that the products of the last two reactions have two names; the systematic name
is given ﬁrst, followed by the common name in parentheses. (This format will be used
throughout this chapter for compounds that have common names.) Also, note that ultraviolet light (hv) furnishes the energy to break the Cl¬Cl bond to produce chlorine
atoms:
Cl2 ¡ Cl   Cl 
A butane lighter used for camping.

A chlorine atom has an unpaired electron, as indicated by the dot, which makes it very
reactive and able to attack the C¬H bond.
Substituted methanes with the general formula CFxCl4x containing both chlorine and
ﬂuorine as substituents are called chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs) and are also known as Freons. These substances are very unreactive and have been extensively used as coolant ﬂuids in refrigerators and air conditioners. Unfortunately, their chemical inertness allows

1004

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules
Freons to remain in the atmosphere so long that they eventually reach altitudes where they
are a threat to the protective ozone layer (see Section 12.8), and the use of these compounds is being rapidly phased out.
Alkanes can also undergo dehydrogenation reactions in which hydrogen atoms are
removed and the product is an unsaturated hydrocarbon. For example, in the presence
of chromium(III) oxide at high temperatures, ethane can be dehydrogenated, yielding
ethylene:

(a)

C

Cr2O3

CH3CH3¬¡
CH2 “CH2  H2
500°C

No “head-on”
overlap of
atomic orbitals

Ethylene

Cyclic Alkanes
109.5°
60°
C

C

(b)

FIGURE 22.5
(a) The molecular structure of cyclopropane
(C3H6). (b) The overlap of the sp3 orbitals
that form the COC bonds in cyclopropane.

Besides forming chains, carbon atoms also form rings. The simplest of the cyclic alkanes
(general formula CnH2n) is cyclopropane (C3H6), shown in Fig. 22.5(a). Since the carbon
atoms in cyclopropane form an equilateral triangle with 60 bond angles, their sp3 hybrid
orbitals do not overlap head-on as in normal alkanes [Fig. 22.5(b)]. This results in unusually
weak, or strained, COC bonds; thus the cyclopropane molecule is much more reactive
than straight-chain propane. The carbon atoms in cyclobutane (C4H8) form a square with
88 bond angles, and cyclobutane is also quite reactive.
The next two members of the series, cyclopentane (C5H10) and cyclohexane (C6H12),
are quite stable, because their rings have bond angles very close to the tetrahedral angles,
which allows the sp3 hybrid orbitals on adjacent carbon atoms to overlap head-on and
form normal C¬C bonds, which are quite strong. To attain the tetrahedral angles, the cyclohexane ring must “pucker”—that is, become nonplanar. Cyclohexane can exist in two
forms, the chair and the boat forms, as shown in Fig. 22.6. The two hydrogen atoms above
the ring in the boat form are quite close to each other, and the resulting repulsion between
these atoms causes the chair form to be preferred. At 25°C more than 99% of cyclohexane
exists in the chair form.
For simplicity, the cyclic alkanes are often represented by the following structures:

Thus the structure

represents methylcyclopropane.
These two H
atoms repel
each other

FIGURE 22.6
The (a) chair and (b) boat forms of
cyclohexane.

Chair

Boat

(a)

(b)

22.2 Alkenes and Alkynes

1005

The nomenclature for cycloalkanes follows the same rules as for the other alkanes
except that the root name is preceded by the preﬁx cyclo-. The ring is numbered to yield
the smallest substituent numbers possible.
Sample Exercise 22.4

Naming Cyclic Alkanes
Name each of the following cyclic alkanes.
a. CH3 CH

CH3

b.

CH2CH3
CH2CH2CH3

CH3

Solution
a. The six-carbon cyclohexane ring is numbered as follows:
CH3O CHO CH3
6
5

1
4

2
3

CH3

There is an isopropyl group at carbon 1 and a methyl group at carbon 3. The name is
1-isopropyl-3-methylcyclohexane, since the alkyl groups are named in alphabetical
order.
b. This is a cyclobutane ring, which is numbered as follows:
CH2CH3
4 1
3 2

CH2CH2CH3
The name is 1-ethyl-2-propylcyclobutane.
See Exercise 22.22.

22.2

Alkenes and Alkynes

Multiple carbon–carbon bonds result when hydrogen atoms are removed from alkanes.
Hydrocarbons that contain at least one carbon–carbon double bond are called alkenes and
have the general formula CnH2n. The simplest alkene (C2H4), commonly known as
ethylene, has the Lewis structure

As discussed in Section 9.1, each carbon in ethylene can be described as sp2 hybridized.
The COC ␴ bond is formed by sharing an electron pair between sp2 orbitals, and the ␲
bond is formed by sharing a pair of electrons between p orbitals (Fig. 22.7).
The systematic nomenclature for alkenes is quite similar to that for alkanes.
1. The root hydrocarbon name ends in -ene rather than -ane. Thus the systematic name
for C2H4 is ethene and the name for C3H6 is propene.
2. In alkenes containing more than three carbon atoms, the location of the double bond
is indicated by the lowest-numbered carbon atom involved in the bond. Thus
CH2PCHCH2CH3 is called 1-butene, and CH3CHPCHCH3 is called 2-butene.

1006

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

sp2
sp2
H1s

sp2

H

sp2
sp2

C

H

H
C

H
C

sp2

C

H1s

H

H
2p

FIGURE 22.8
The bonding in ethane.

FIGURE 22.7
The bonding in ethylene.

For cyclic alkenes, number through the
double bond toward the substituent.

Note from Fig. 22.7 that the p orbitals on the two carbon atoms in ethylene must be
lined up (parallel) to allow formation of the ␲ bond. This prevents rotation of the two CH2
groups relative to each other at ordinary temperatures, in contrast to alkanes, where free
rotation is possible (see Fig. 22.8). The restricted rotation around doubly bonded carbon
atoms means that alkenes exhibit cis–trans isomerism. For example, there are two stereoisomers of 2-butene (Fig. 22.9). Identical substituents on the same side of the double bond
are designated cis and those on opposite sides are labeled trans.
Alkynes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing at least one triple carbon–carbon
bond. The simplest alkyne is C2H2 (commonly called acetylene), which has the systematic
name ethyne. As discussed in Section 9.1, the triple bond in acetylene can be described
as one ␴ bond between two sp hybrid orbitals on the two carbon atoms and two ␲ bonds
involving two 2p orbitals on each carbon atom (Fig. 22.10).
The nomenclature for alkynes involves the use of -yne as a sufﬁx to replace the -ane
of the parent alkane. Thus the molecule CH3CH2CqCCH3 has the name 2-pentyne.
Like alkanes, unsaturated hydrocarbons can exist as ringed structures, for example,

FIGURE 22.9
The two stereoisomers of 2-butene: (a) cis2-butene and (b) trans-2-butene.

2p

2p
2p

H1s

H1s

2p

H

C
sp

FIGURE 22.10
The bonding in acetylene.

H

C

2p
2p
2p

sp

2p

sp

22.2 Alkenes and Alkynes

Sample Exercise 22.5

1007

Naming Alkenes and Alkynes
Name each of the following molecules.
a.

b.

Solution
a. The longest chain, which contains six carbon atoms, is numbered as follows:
1

H
6

5

4

G3 2D
CPC
D
G

CH3CH2CH
A
CH3

CH3
H

Thus the hydrocarbon is a 2-hexene. Since the hydrogen atoms are located on opposite sides of the double bond, this molecule corresponds to the trans isomer. The name
is 4-methyl-trans-2-hexene.
b. The longest chain, consisting of seven carbon atoms, is numbered as shown (giving
the triple bond the lowest possible number):
1

A worker using an oxyacetylene torch.

2

3

45

6

7

CH3CH2CqCCHCH2CH3
A
CH2
A
CH3
The hydrocarbon is a 3-heptyne. The full name is 5-ethyl-3-heptyne, where the position of the triple bond is indicated by the lower-numbered carbon atom involved in this
bond.
See Exercises 22.25 through 22.28 and 22.44.

Reactions of Alkenes and Alkynes
Because alkenes and alkynes are unsaturated, their most important reactions are addition
reactions. In these reactions p bonds, which are weaker than the C¬C s bonds, are broken, and new ␴ bonds are formed to the atoms being added. For example, hydrogenation reactions involve the addition of hydrogen atoms:
Catalyst

CH2 “CHCH3  H2 ¬¡ CH3CH2CH3
1-Propene

Propane

For this reaction to proceed rapidly at normal temperatures, a catalyst of platinum, palladium, or nickel is used. The catalyst serves to help break the relatively strong H¬H
bond, as was discussed in Section 12.8. Hydrogenation of alkenes is an important industrial process, particularly in the manufacture of solid shortenings where unsaturated
fats (fats containing double bonds), which are generally liquid, are converted to solid
saturated fats.

1008

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules
Halogenation of unsaturated hydrocarbons involves addition of halogen atoms. For
example,
CH2 “CHCH2CH2CH3  Br2 ¡ CH2BrCHBrCH2CH2CH3
1-Pentene

1,2-Dibromopentane

Another important reaction involving certain unsaturated hydrocarbons is polymerization, a process in which many small molecules are joined together to form a large molecule. Polymerization will be discussed in Section 22.5.

22.3

Aromatic Hydrocarbons

A special class of cyclic unsaturated hydrocarbons is known as the aromatic hydrocarbons. The simplest of these is benzene (C6H6 ) , which has a planar ring structure, as shown
in Fig. 22.11(a). In the localized electron model of the bonding in benzene, resonance
structures of the type shown in Fig. 22.11(b) are used to account for the known equivalence of all the carbon–carbon bonds. But as we discussed in Section 9.5, the best
description of the benzene molecule assumes that sp2 hybrid orbitals on each carbon are
used to form the C¬C and C¬H s bonds, while the remaining 2p orbital on each carbon
is used to form ␲ molecular orbitals. The delocalization of these p electrons is usually
indicated by a circle inside the ring [Fig. 22.11(c)].
The delocalization of the p electrons makes the benzene ring behave quite differently
from a typical unsaturated hydrocarbon. As we have seen previously, unsaturated hydrocarbons generally undergo rapid addition reactions. However, benzene does not. Instead,
it undergoes substitution reactions in which hydrogen atoms are replaced by other atoms.
For example,

In each case the substance shown over the arrow is needed to catalyze these substitution
reactions.
Substitution reactions are characteristic of saturated hydrocarbons, and addition
reactions are characteristic of unsaturated ones. The fact that benzene reacts more like a
saturated hydrocarbon indicates the great stability of the delocalized ␲ electron system.

22.3 Aromatic Hydrocarbons

1009

FIGURE 22.11
(a) The structure of benzene, a planar ring
system in which all bond angles are 120°.
(b) Two of the resonance structures of
benzene. (c) The usual representation of
benzene. The circle represents the electrons
in the delocalized ␲ system. All COC
bonds in benzene are equivalent.

The nomenclature of benzene derivatives is similar to the nomenclature for saturated
ring systems. If there is more than one substituent present, numbers are used to indicate
substituent positions. For example, the compound
6
1

Cl

2

Cl

5
4
3

is named 1,2-dichlorobenzene. Another nomenclature system uses the preﬁx ortho- (o-)
for two adjacent substituents, meta- (m-) for two substituents with one carbon between
them, and para- (p-) for two substituents opposite each other. When benzene is used as
a substituent, it is called the phenyl group. Examples of some aromatic compounds are
shown in Fig. 22.12.
Benzene is the simplest aromatic molecule. More complex aromatic systems can be
viewed as consisting of a number of “fused” benzene rings. Some examples are given in
Table 22.3.

FIGURE 22.12
Some selected substituted benzenes and
their names. Common names are given in
parentheses.

1010

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

TABLE 22.3

More Complex Aromatic Systems

Structural Formula

22.4

Name

Use of Effect

Naphthalene

Formerly used in mothballs

Anthracene

Dyes

Phenanthrene

Dyes, explosives, and synthesis
of drugs

3,4-Benzpyrene

Active carcinogen found in
smoke and smog

Hydrocarbon Derivatives

The vast majority of organic molecules contain elements in addition to carbon and hydrogen. However, most of these substances can be viewed as hydrocarbon derivatives,
molecules that are fundamentally hydrocarbons but that have additional atoms or groups
of atoms called functional groups. The common functional groups are listed in Table
22.4. Because each functional group exhibits characteristic chemistry, we will consider
the groups separately.

Alcohols
Alcohols are characterized by the presence of the hydroxyl group (OOH). Some common alcohols are shown in Table 22.5. The systematic name for an alcohol is obtained
by replacing the ﬁnal -e of the parent hydrocarbon with -ol. The position of the OOH
group is speciﬁed by a number (where necessary) chosen so that it is the smallest of
the substituent numbers. Alcohols are classiﬁed according to the number of hydrocarbon fragments bonded to the carbon where the OOH group is attached (see margin), where R, R , and R (which may be the same or different) represent hydrocarbon
fragments.
Alcohols usually have much higher boiling points than might be expected from their
molar masses. For example, both methanol and ethane have a molar mass of 30, but the
boiling point for methanol is 65C while that for ethane is 89C. This difference can
be understood if we consider the types of intermolecular attractions that occur in these
liquids. Ethane molecules are nonpolar and exhibit only weak London dispersion interactions. However, the polar OOH group of methanol produces extensive hydrogen bonding similar to that found in water (see Section 10.1), which results in the relatively high
boiling point.
Although there are many important alcohols, the simplest ones, methanol and ethanol,
have the greatest commercial value. Methanol, also known as wood alcohol because it
was formerly obtained by heating wood in the absence of air, is prepared industrially

22.4 Hydrocarbon Derivatives

TABLE 22.4

1011

The Common Functional Groups
Functional
Group

Class

General
Formula*

Example

Halohydrocarbons

OX (F, Cl, Br, I)

ROX

CH3I
Iodomethane
(methyl iodide)

Alcohols

OOH

ROOH

CH3OH
Methanol
(methyl alcohol)

Ethers

OOO

ROOOR

CH3OCH3
Dimethyl ether
CH2O
Methanal
(formaldehyde)

Aldehydes

CH3COCH3
Propanone
(dimethyl ketone
or acetone)

Ketones

CH3COOH
Ethanoic acid
(acetic acid)

Carboxylic acids

CH3COOCH2CH3
Ethyl acetate

Esters
ONH2

Amines

RONH2

CH3NH2
Aminomethane
(methylamine)

*R and R¿ represent hydrocarbon fragments.

(approximately 4 million tons annually in the United States) by the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide:
400°C

CO  2H2 ¬¬¡
CH3OH
ZnO/Cr O
2

3

Methanol is used as a starting material for the synthesis of acetic acid and for many types
of adhesives, ﬁbers, and plastics. It is also used (and such use may increase) as a motor
fuel. Methanol is highly toxic to humans and can lead to blindness and death if ingested.
Ethanol is the alcohol found in beverages such as beer, wine, and whiskey; it is produced by the fermentation of glucose in corn, barley, grapes, and so on:
Yeast

C6H12O6 ¬¡ 2CH3CH2OH  2CO2
Glucose

TABLE 22.5

A winemaker drawing off a glass of wine
in a modern wine cellar.

Ethanol

Some Common Alcohols

Formula

Systematic Name

Common Name

CH3OH
CH3CH2OH
CH3CH2CH2OH
CH3CHCH3
!
OH

Methanol
Ethanol
1-Propanol
2-Propanol

Methyl alcohol
Ethyl alcohol
n-Propyl alcohol
Isopropyl alcohol

1012

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules
The reaction is catalyzed by the enzymes found in yeast. This reaction can proceed only
until the alcohol content reaches about 13% (the percentage found in most wines), at which
point the yeast can no longer survive. Beverages with higher alcohol content are made by
distilling the fermentation mixture.
Ethanol, like methanol, can be burned in the internal combustion engines of automobiles and is now commonly added to gasoline to form gasohol (see Section 6.6). It is
also used in industry as a solvent and for the preparation of acetic acid. The commercial
production of ethanol (500,000 tons per year in the United States) is carried out by reaction of water with ethylene:
Acid

CH2 “CH2  H2O ¬¬¡
CH3CH2OH
Catalyst
Many polyhydroxyl (more than one OOH group) alcohols are known, the most important being 1,2-ethanediol (ethylene glycol),

a toxic substance that is the major constituent of most automobile antifreeze solutions.
The simplest aromatic alcohol is
Ethanol is being tested in selected areas
as a fuel for automobiles.

which is commonly called phenol. Most of the 1 million tons of phenol produced annually in the United States is used to make polymers for adhesives and plastics.

Sample Exercise 22.6

Naming and Classifying Alcohols
For each of the following alcohols, give the systematic name and specify whether the alcohol is primary, secondary, or tertiary.
a.
c.
b. ClCH2CH2CH2OH
Solution
a. The chain is numbered as follows:
1

2

3

4

CH3CHCH2CH3
A
OH
The compound is called 2-butanol, since the OOH group is located at the number 2
position of a four-carbon chain. Note that the carbon to which the OOH is attached
also has OCH3 and OCH2CH3 groups attached:

R

H
A
CH3O CO CH2CH3
A
OH

Therefore, this is a secondary alcohol.

R

22.4 Hydrocarbon Derivatives

1013

b. The chain is numbered as follows:
3

2

1

Cl¬CH2¬CH2¬CH2¬OH
The name is 3-chloro-1-propanol. This is a primary alcohol:
H
A
ClO CH2CH2O COOH
A
H
One R group attached to the carbon with the OOH group

c. The chain is numbered as follows:
CH3
A 3
6
4
5
2A
CH3O COCH2O CH2O CH2O CH2Br
A
OH
1

The name is 6-bromo-2-methyl-2-hexanol. This is a tertiary alcohol since the carbon where
the OOH is attached also has three other R groups attached.
See Exercises 22.51 and 22.52.

Aldehydes and Ketones
Aldehydes and ketones contain the carbonyl group,

In ketones this group is bonded to two carbon atoms, as in acetone,

In aldehydes the carbonyl group is bonded to at least one hydrogen atom, as in formaldehyde,

Cinnamaldehyde produces the characteristic
odor of cinnamon.

or acetaldehyde,

The systematic name for an aldehyde is obtained from the parent alkane by removing the ﬁnal -e and adding -al. For ketones the ﬁnal -e is replaced by -one, and a number
indicates the position of the carbonyl group where necessary. Examples of common aldehydes and ketones are shown in Fig. 22.13. Note that since the aldehyde functional group
always occurs at the end of the carbon chain, the aldehyde carbon is assigned the number 1 when substituent positions are listed in the name.
Ketones often have useful solvent properties (acetone is found in nail polish remover,
for example) and are frequently used in industry for this purpose. Aldehydes typically have
strong odors. Vanillin is responsible for the pleasant odor in vanilla beans; cinnamaldehyde

1014

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

FIGURE 22.13
Some common ketones and aldehydes. Note that since the aldehyde functional group
always appears at the end of a carbon chain, carbon is assigned the number 1 when the
compound is named.

produces the characteristic odor of cinnamon. On the other hand, the unpleasant odor in
rancid butter arises from the presence of butyraldehyde.
Aldehydes and ketones are most often produced commercially by the oxidation
of alcohols. For example, oxidation of a primary alcohol yields the corresponding
aldehyde:
CH3CH2OH

Oxidation

J
CH3C
G

O
H

Oxidation of a secondary alcohol results in a ketone:
CH3CHCH3
A
OH

Oxidation

CH3CCH3
B
O

Carboxylic Acids and Esters
Carboxylic acids are characterized by the presence of the carboxyl group

FIGURE 22.14
Some carboxylic acids.

that gives an acid of the general formula RCOOH. Typically, these molecules are weak
acids in aqueous solution (see Section 14.5). Organic acids are named from the parent
alkane by dropping the ﬁnal -e and adding -oic. Thus CH3COOH, commonly called acetic
acid, has the systematic name ethanoic acid, since the parent alkane is ethane. Other
examples of carboxylic acids are shown in Fig. 22.14.
Many carboxylic acids are synthesized by oxidizing primary alcohols with a strong
oxidizing agent. For example, ethanol can be oxidized to acetic acid by using potassium
permanganate:
KMnO4(aq)

CH3CH2OH ¬¬¡ CH3COOH

22.4 Hydrocarbon Derivatives

1015

A carboxylic acid reacts with an alcohol to form an ester and a water molecule. For
example, the reaction of acetic acid with ethanol produces ethyl acetate and water:

Esters often have a sweet, fruity odor that is in contrast to the often pungent odors of the
parent carboxylic acids. For example, the odor of bananas is caused by n-amyl acetate,

and that of oranges is caused by n-octyl acetate,

The systematic name for an ester is formed by changing the -oic ending of the parent acid
to -oate. The parent alcohol chain is named ﬁrst with a -yl ending. For example, the systematic name for n-octyl acetate is n-octylethanoate (from ethanoic acid).
A very important ester is formed from the reaction of salicylic acid and acetic acid:

Aspirin tablets.

The product is acetylsalicylic acid, commonly known as aspirin, which is used in huge
quantities as an analgesic (painkiller).

Amines

Computer-generated space-ﬁlling model of
acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin).

Amines are probably best viewed as derivatives of ammonia in which one or more NOH
bonds are replaced by NOC bonds. The resulting amines are classiﬁed as primary if one
NOC bond is present, secondary if two NOC bonds are present, and tertiary if all three
NOH bonds in NH3 have been replaced by NOC bonds (Fig. 22.15). Examples of some
common amines are given in Table 22.6.
Common names are often used for simple amines; the systematic nomenclature for
more complex molecules uses the name amino- for the ONH2 functional group. For example, the molecule

is named 2-aminobutane.
Many amines have unpleasant “ﬁshlike” odors. For example, the odors associated
with decaying animal and human tissues are caused by amines such as putrescine
(H2NCH2CH2CH2NH2) and cadaverine (H2NCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2NH2).
Aromatic amines are primarily used to make dyes. Since many of them are carcinogenic, they must be handled with great care.

1016

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

TABLE 22.6

Some Common Amines

Formula

Common Name

Type

CH3NH2

Methylamine

Primary

CH3CH2NH2

Ethylamine

Primary

(CH3)2NH

Dimethylamine

Secondary

(CH3)3N

Trimethylamine

Tertiary

Aniline

Primary

Diphenylamine

Secondary

FIGURE 22.15
The general formulas for primary, secondary, and tertiary amines. R, R , and R
represent carbon-containing substituents.

22.5

Polymers

Polymers are large, usually chainlike molecules that are built from small molecules called
monomers. Polymers form the basis for synthetic ﬁbers, rubbers, and plastics and have
played a leading role in the revolution that has been brought about in daily life by chemistry. It has been estimated that about 50% of the industrial chemists in the United States
work in some area of polymer chemistry, a fact that illustrates just how important polymers are to our economy and standard of living.

The Development and Properties of Polymers

The soybeans on the left are coated with
a red acrylic polymer to delay soybean
emergence. This allows farmers to plant
their crops more efﬁciently.

The development of the polymer industry provides a striking example of the importance
of serendipity in the progress of science. Many discoveries in polymer chemistry arose
from accidental observations that scientists followed up.
The age of plastics might be traced to a day in 1846 when Christian Schoenbein, a
chemistry professor at the University of Basel in Switzerland, spilled a ﬂask containing
nitric and sulfuric acids. In his hurry to clean up the spill, he grabbed his wife’s cotton
apron, which he then rinsed out and hung up in front of a hot stove to dry. Instead of drying, the apron ﬂared and burned.
Very interested in this event, Schoenbein repeated the reaction under more controlled
conditions and found that the new material, which he correctly concluded to be nitrated
cellulose, had some surprising properties. As he had experienced, the nitrated cellulose is
extremely ﬂammable and, under certain circumstances, highly explosive. In addition, he
found that it could be molded at moderate temperatures to give objects that were, upon
cooling, tough but elastic. Predictably, the explosive nature of the substance was initially
of more interest than its other properties, and cellulose nitrate rapidly became the basis
for smokeless gun powder. Although Schoenbein’s discovery cannot be described as a
truly synthetic polymer (because he simply found a way to modify the natural polymer
cellulose), it formed the basis for a large number of industries that grew up to produce
photographic ﬁlms, artiﬁcial ﬁbers, and molded objects of all types.
The ﬁrst synthetic polymers were produced as by-products of various organic reactions and were regarded as unwanted contaminants. Thus the ﬁrst preparations of many
of the polymers now regarded as essential to our modern lifestyle were thrown away in

22.5 Polymers

A radio from the 1930s made of Bakelite.

Nylon netting magniﬁed 62 times.

Charles Goodyear tried for many years
to change natural rubber into a useful
product. In 1839 he accidentally dropped
some rubber containing sulfur on a hot
stove. Noting that the rubber did not melt
as expected, Goodyear pursued this lead
and developed vulcanization.

1017

disgust. One chemist who refused to be defeated by the “tarry” products obtained when
he reacted phenol with formaldehyde was the Belgian-American chemist Leo H. Baekeland
(1863–1944). Baekeland’s work resulted in the ﬁrst completely synthetic plastic (called
Bakelite), a substance that when molded to a certain shape under high pressure and
temperature cannot be softened again or dissolved. Bakelite is a thermoset polymer. In
contrast, cellulose nitrate is a thermoplastic polymer; that is, it can be remelted after it
has been molded.
The discovery of Bakelite in 1907 spawned a large plastics industry, producing telephones, billiard balls, and insulators for electrical devices. During the early days of polymer chemistry, there was a great deal of controversy over the nature of these materials.
Although the German chemist Hermann Staudinger speculated in 1920 that polymers were
very large molecules held together by strong chemical bonds, most chemists of the time
assumed that these materials were much like colloids, in which small molecules are aggregated into large units by forces weaker than chemical bonds.
One chemist who contributed greatly to the understanding of polymers as giant molecules was Wallace H. Carothers of the DuPont Chemical Company. Among his accomplishments was the preparation of nylon. The nylon story further illustrates the importance
of serendipity in scientiﬁc research. When nylon is ﬁrst prepared, the resulting product is
a sticky material with little structural integrity. Because of this, it was initially put aside as
having no apparently useful characteristics. However, Julian Hill, a chemist in the Carothers
research group, one day put a small ball of this nylon on the end of a stirring rod and drew
it away from the remaining sticky mass, forming a string. He noticed the silky appearance
and strength of this thread and realized that nylon could be drawn into useful ﬁbers.
The reason for this behavior of nylon is now understood. When nylon is ﬁrst formed,
the individual polymer chains are oriented randomly, like cooked spaghetti, and the substance is highly amorphous. However, when drawn out into a thread, the chains tend to
line up (the nylon becomes more crystalline), which leads to increased hydrogen bonding
between adjacent chains. This increase in crystallinity, along with the resulting increase
in hydrogen-bonding interactions, leads to strong ﬁbers and thus to a highly useful material. Commercially, nylon is produced by forcing the raw material through a spinneret, a
plate containing small holes, which forces the polymer chains to line up.
Another property that adds strength to polymers is crosslinking, the existence of covalent bonds between adjacent chains. The structure of Bakelite is highly crosslinked, which
accounts for the strength and toughness of this polymer. Another example of crosslinking
occurs in the manufacture of rubber. Raw natural rubber consists of chains of the type

and is a soft, sticky material unsuitable for tires. However, in 1839 Charles Goodyear
(1800–1860), an American chemist, accidentally found that if sulfur is added to rubber
and the resulting mixture is heated (a process called vulcanization), the resulting rubber
is still elastic (reversibly stretchable) but is much stronger. This change in character occurs
because sulfur atoms become bonded between carbon atoms on different chains. These
sulfur atoms form bridges between the polymer chains, thus linking the chains together.

Types of Polymers
The simplest and one of the best-known polymers is polyethylene, which is constructed
from ethylene monomers:

nCH2P CH2

Catalyst

H H
A A
OCO CO
A A
H H n

1018

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Heal Thyself
ne major problem with structural materials is that they
crack and weaken as they age. The human body has
mechanisms for healing itself if the skin is cut or a bone is
broken. However, inanimate materials have had no such
mechanisms—until now. Scientists at the University of
Illinois at Urbana–Champaign (UIUC) have invented a plastic that automatically heals microscopic cracks before they
can develop into large cracks that would degrade the usefulness of the material. This accomplishment was achieved
by an interdisciplinary team of scientists including aeronautical engineering professors Scott White and Philippe
Geubelle, applied mechanics professor Nancy Sottos, and
chemistry professor Jeffrey Moore.
The self-healing system is based on microcapsules containing liquid dicyclopentadiene

O

Dicyclopentadiene

that are blended into the plastic. When a microscopic crack
develops, it encounters and breaks a microcapsule. The dicyclopentadiene then leaks out, where it encounters a catalyst (blended into the plastic when it was formulated) that
mediates a repair polymerization process. This process involves opening the cyclopentadiene rings, which leads to a
highly cross-linked repair of the crack.
The trickiest part of the repair mechanism is to get the
microcapsules to be the correct size and to have the appropriate wall strength. They must be small enough not to degrade the strength of the plastic. The walls must also be thick
enough to survive the molding of the plastic but thin enough
to burst as the lengthening crack reaches them.
Self-healing materials should have many applications.
The U.S. Air Force, which partially funded the research at
UIUC, is interested in using the materials in tanks that hold
gases and liquids under pressure. The current materials used
for these tanks are subject to microcracks that eventually
grow, causing the tanks to leak. Self-healing materials would

where n represents a large number (usually several thousand). Polyethylene is a tough,
ﬂexible plastic used for piping, bottles, electrical insulation, packaging ﬁlms, garbage bags,
and many other purposes. Its properties can be varied by using substituted ethylene
monomers. For example, when tetraﬂuoroethylene is the monomer, the polymer Teﬂon is
obtained:

Cross-linking gives the rubber in these tires
strength and toughness.

The discovery of Teﬂon, a very important substituted polyethylene, is another illustration of the role of chance in chemical research. In 1938 a DuPont chemist named Roy
Plunkett was studying the chemistry of gaseous tetraﬂuoroethylene. He synthesized about
100 pounds of the chemical and stored it in steel cylinders. When one of the cylinders
failed to produce perﬂuoroethylene gas when the valve was opened, the cylinder was cut
open to reveal a white powder. This powder turned out to be a polymer of perﬂuoroethylene, which was eventually developed into Teﬂon. Because of the resistance of the strong
COF bonds to chemical attack, Teﬂon is an inert, tough, and nonﬂammable material
widely used for electrical insulation, nonstick coatings on cooking utensils, and bearings
for low-temperature applications.
Other polyethylene-type polymers are made from monomers containing chloro, methyl,
cyano, and phenyl substituents, as summarized in Table 22.7 on page 1020. In each case
the double carbon–carbon bond in the substituted ethylene monomer becomes a single bond
in the polymer. The different substituents lead to a wide variety of properties.

22.5 Polymers

1019

also be valuable in situations where repair is impossible or impractical, such as
electronic circuit boards, components of
deep space probes, and implanted medical devices.

A scanning electron microscope image showing the fractured plane of a self-healing material
with a ruptured microcapsule in a thermosetting matrix.

The polyethylene polymers illustrate one of the major types of polymerization reactions, called addition polymerization, in which the monomers simply “add together” to
produce the polymer. No other products are formed. The polymerization process is initiated by a free radical (a species with an unpaired electron) such as the hydroxyl radical
(HO). The free radical attacks and breaks the ␲ bond of an ethylene molecule to form a
new free radical,

which is then available to attack another ethylene molecule:
H
H
G
D
CPC
D
G
H
H

H
H H H
A A A
A
HO COO CO COC
A A A
A
OH H H H

H H
A A
HO CO C
A A
HO H
Repetition of this process thousands of times creates a long-chain polymer. Termination
of the growth of the chain occurs when two radicals react to form a bond, a process that
consumes two radicals without producing any others.

1020

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

TABLE 22.7

Some Common Synthetic Polymers, Their Monomers and Applications

Monomer
Name

Polymer
Formula

Ethylene

H2CPCH2

Name

Polyethylene

Formula

O(CH2OCH2)O
n

Uses

Plastic piping,
bottles, electrical
insulation, toys

Propylene

Polypropylene

Film for packaging,
carpets, lab
wares, toys

Vinyl
chloride

Polyvinyl chloride
(PVC)

Piping, siding, ﬂoor
tile, clothing, toys

Acrylonitrile

Polyacrylonitrile
(PAN)

Carpets, fabrics

Tetraﬂuoro
ethylene

F2CPCF2

Teflon

Styrene

Polystyrene

Butadiene

Polybutadiene

Butadiene
and styrene

(See above.)

Visualization: Synthesis of
Nylon

Styrene-butadiene
rubber

O(CF2OCF2O
)n

Cooking utensils,
electrical insulation,
bearings
Containers, thermal
insulation, toys

O(CH2CHPCHCH2O
)n

Tire tread, coating
resin
Synthetic rubber

Another common type of polymerization is condensation polymerization, in which
a small molecule, such as water, is formed for each extension of the polymer chain. The
most familiar polymer produced by condensation is nylon. Nylon is a copolymer, since
two different types of monomers combine to form the chain; a homopolymer is the result of polymerizing a single type of monomer. One common form of nylon is produced
when hexamethylenediamine and adipic acid react by splitting out a water molecule to
form a CON bond:

22.5 Polymers

1021

The molecule formed, called a dimer (two monomers joined), can undergo further condensation reactions since it has an amino group at one end and a carboxyl group at the
other. Thus both ends are free to react with another monomer. Repetition of this process
leads to a long chain of the type

which is the basic structure of nylon. The reaction to form nylon occurs quite readily and
is often used as a lecture demonstration (see Fig. 22.16). The properties of nylon can be
varied by changing the number of carbon atoms in the chain of the acid or amine monomer.
More than 1 million tons of nylon is produced annually in the United States for use
in clothing, carpets, rope, and so on. Many other types of condensation polymers are also
produced. For example, Dacron is a copolymer formed from the condensation reaction of
ethylene glycol (a dialcohol) and p-terephthalic acid (a dicarboxylic acid):

FIGURE 22.16
The reaction to form nylon can be carried
out at the interface of two immiscible liquid layers in a beaker. The bottom layer
contains adipoyl chloride,

The repeating unit of Dacron is

dissolved in CCl4, and the top layer contains hexamethylenediamine,
)6 NH2
H2NO(CH2O
dissolved in water. A molecule of HCl is
formed as each C¬N bond forms.

Note that this polymerization involves a carboxylic acid and an alcohol forming an ester
group:

Thus Dacron is called a polyester. By itself or blended with cotton, Dacron is widely used
in ﬁbers for the manufacture of clothing.

Polymers Based on Ethylene
A large section of the polymer industry involves the production of macromolecules from
ethylene or substituted ethylenes. As discussed previously, ethylene molecules polymerize by addition after the double bond has been broken by some initiator:

psi is the abbreviation for pounds per
square inch: 15 psi  1 atm.

This process continues by adding new ethylene molecules to eventually give polyethylene, a thermoplastic material.
There are two forms of polyethylene: low-density polyethylene (LDPE) and highdensity polyethylene (HDPE). The chains in LDPE contain many branches and thus do
not pack as tightly as those in HDPE, which consist of mostly straight-chain molecules.
Traditionally, LDPE has been manufactured under conditions of high pressure
(20,000 psi) and high temperature (500C). These severe reaction conditions require
specially designed equipment, and for safety reasons the reaction usually has been run
behind a reinforced concrete barrier. More recently, lower reaction pressures and

1022

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Wallace Hume Carothers
allace H. Carothers. a brilliant organic chemist who
was principally responsible for the development of
nylon and the ﬁrst synthetic rubber (Neoprene), was born
in 1896 in Burlington, Iowa. As a youth, Carothers was
fascinated by tools and mechanical devices and spent many
hours experimenting. In 1915 he entered Tarkio College in
Missouri. Carothers so excelled in chemistry that even
before his graduation, he was made a chemistry instructor.
Carothers eventually moved to the University of Illinois
at Urbana–Champaign, where he was appointed to the faculty
when he completed his Ph.D. in organic chemistry in 1924.
He moved to Harvard University in 1926, and then to DuPont
in 1928 to participate in a new program in fundamental research. At DuPont, Carothers headed the organic chemistry
division, and during his ten years there played a prominent
role in laying the foundations of polymer chemistry.
By the age of 33, Carothers had become a world-famous
chemist whose advice was sought by almost everyone working in polymers. He was the ﬁrst industrial chemist to be
elected to the prestigious National Academy of Sciences.
Carothers was an avid reader of poetry and a lover of
classical music. Unfortunately, he also suffered from severe
bouts of depression that ﬁnally led to his suicide in 1937
in a Philadelphia hotel room, where he drank a cyanide

W

Molecular weight (not molar mass) is the
common terminology in the polymer
industry.

Wallace H. Carothers.

solution. He was 41 years old. Despite the brevity of his career, Carothers was truly one of the ﬁnest American chemists
of all time. His great intellect, his love of chemistry, and his
insistence on perfection produced his special genius.

temperatures have become possible through the use of catalysts. One catalytic system using triethylaluminum, Al(C2H5)3, and titanium(IV) chloride was developed by Karl Ziegler
in Germany and Giulio Natta in Italy. Although this catalyst is very efﬁcient, it catches
ﬁre on contact with air and must be handled very carefully. A safer catalytic system was
developed at Phillips Petroleum Company. It uses a chromium(III) oxide (Cr2O3) and aluminosilicate catalyst and has mainly taken over in the United States. The product of the
catalyzed reaction is highly linear (unbranched) and is often called linear low-density polyethylene. It is very similar to HDPE.
The major use of LDPE is in the manufacture of the tough transparent ﬁlm that is
used in packaging so many consumer goods. Two-thirds of the approximately 10 billion
pounds of LDPE produced annually in the United States are used for this purpose. The
major use of HDPE is for blow-molded products, such as bottles for consumer products
(see Fig. 22.17).
The useful properties of polyethylene are due primarily to its high molecular weight
(molar mass). Although the strengths of the interactions between speciﬁc points on the
nonpolar chains are quite small, the chains are so long that these small attractions accumulate to a very signiﬁcant value, so that the chains stick together very tenaciously. There
is also a great deal of physical tangling of the lengthy chains. The combination of these
interactions gives the polymer strength and toughness. However, a material like polyethylene can be melted and formed into a new shape (thermoplastic behavior), because in
the melted state the molecules can readily ﬂow past one another.

22.5 Polymers
Open die

FIGURE 22.17
A major use of HDPE is for blow-molded
objects such as bottles for soft drinks,
shampoos, bleaches, and so on. (a) A tube
composed of HDPE is inserted into the
mold (die). (b) The die closes, sealing the
bottom of the tube. (c) Compressed air is
forced into the warm HDPE tube, which
then expands to take the shape of the
die. (d) The molded bottle is removed from
the die.

HDPE
tube

(a)

1023

Compressed air
Blow-molded bottle

(b)

(c)

(d)

Since a high molecular weight gives a polymer useful properties, one might think that
the goal would be to produce polymers with chains as long as possible. However, this is
not the case—polymers become much more difﬁcult to process as the molecular weights
increase. Most industrial operations require that the polymer ﬂow through pipes as it is
processed. But as the chain lengths increase, viscosity also increases. In practice, the upper limit of a polymer’s molecular weight is set by the ﬂow requirements of the manufacturing process. Thus the ﬁnal product often reﬂects a compromise between the optimal
properties for the application and those needed for ease of processing.
Although many polymer properties are greatly inﬂuenced by molecular weight, some
other important properties are not. For example, chain length does not affect a polymer’s
resistance to chemical attack. Physical properties such as color, refractive index, hardness,
density, and electrical conductivity are also not greatly inﬂuenced by molecular weight.
We have already seen that one way of altering the strength of a polymeric materials
is to vary the chain length. Another method for modifying polymer behavior involves varying the substituents. For example, if we use a monomer of the type

the properties of the resulting polymer depend on the identity of X. The simplest example is polypropylene, whose monomer is

and that has the form

The CH3 groups can be arranged on the same side of the chain (called an isotactic chain)
as shown above, can alternate (called a syndiotactic chain) as shown below,

or can be randomly distributed (called an atactic chain).

1024

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Plastic That Talks and Listens
magine a plastic so “smart” that it can be used to sense a
baby’s breath, measure the force of a karate punch, sense
the presence of a person 100 feet away, or make a balloon
that sings. There is a plastic ﬁlm capable of doing all these
things. It’s called polyvinylidene diﬂuoride (PVDF), which
has the structure

I

F

F
C

F
C

H

F
C

H

C
H

H

When this polymer is processed in a particular way, it becomes piezoelectric and pyroelectric. A piezoelectric substance produces an electric current when it is physically deformed or alternatively undergoes a deformation caused by
the application of a current. A pyroelectric material is one
that develops an electrical potential in response to a change
in its temperature.
Because PVDF is piezoelectric, it can be used to construct a paper-thin microphone; it responds to sound by producing a current proportional to the deformation caused by
the sound waves. A ribbon of PVDF plastic one-quarter of

an inch wide could be strung along a hallway and used to
listen to all the conversations going on as people walk
through. On the other hand, electric pulses can be applied
to the PVDF ﬁlm to produce a speaker. A strip of PVDF
ﬁlm glued to the inside of a balloon can play any song stored
on a microchip attached to the ﬁlm—hence a balloon that
can sing “Happy Birthday” at a party. The PVDF ﬁlm can
also be used to construct a sleep apnea monitor, which, when
placed beside the mouth of a sleeping infant, will set off an
alarm if the breathing stops, thus helping to prevent sudden
infant death syndrome (SIDS). The same type of ﬁlm is used
by the U.S. Olympic karate team to measure the force of
kicks and punches as the team trains. Also, gluing two strips
of ﬁlm together gives a material that curls in response to a
current, creating an artiﬁcial muscle. In addition, because
the PVDF ﬁlm is pyroelectric, it responds to the infrared
(heat) radiation emitted by a human as far away as 100 feet,
making it useful for burglar alarm systems.
Making the PVDF polymer piezoelectric and pyroelectric requires some very special processing, which makes it
costly ($10 per square foot). This expense seems a small
price to pay for its near-magical properties.

The chain arrangement has a signiﬁcant effect on the polymer’s properties. Most
polypropylene is made using the Ziegler-Natta catalyst, Al(C2H5)3  TiCl4, which produces
highly isotactic chains that pack together quite closely. As a result, polypropylene is more
crystalline, and therefore stronger and harder, than polyethylene. The major uses of
polypropylene are for molded parts (40%), ﬁbers (35%), and packaging ﬁlms (10%).
Polypropylene ﬁbers are especially useful for athletic wear because they do not absorb
water from perspiration, as cotton does. Rather, the moisture is drawn away from the skin
to the surface of the polypropylene garment, where it can evaporate. The annual U.S. production of polypropylene is about 7 billion pounds.
Another related polymer, polystyrene, is constructed from the monomer styrene,

Pure polystyrene is too brittle for many uses, so most polystyrene-based polymers are actually copolymers of styrene and butadiene,

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

22.6 Natural Polymers

1025

thus incorporating bits of butadiene rubber into the polystyrene matrix. The resulting polymer is very tough and is often used as a substitute for wood in furniture.
Another polystyrene-based product is acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS), a
tough, hard, and chemically resistant plastic used for pipes and for items such as radio housings, telephone cases, and golf club heads, for which shock resistance is an
essential property. Originally, ABS was produced by copolymerization of the three
monomers:

PVC pipe is widely used in industry.

It is now prepared by a special process called grafting, in which butadiene
is polymerized ﬁrst, and then the cyanide and phenyl substituents are added chemically.
Another high-volume polymer, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), is constructed from the
monomer vinyl chloride,

22.6

Natural Polymers

Proteins

The protein in muscles enables them to
contract.

-Carbon

H

A

O

J
R O CO C
G
A
NH2

OH

We have seen that many useful synthetic materials are polymers. Thus it should not be
surprising that a great many natural materials are also polymers: starch, hair, silicate chains
in soil and rocks, silk and cotton ﬁbers, and the cellulose in woody plants, to name only
a few.
In this section we consider a class of natural polymers, the proteins, which make up
about 15% of our bodies and have molecular weights (molar masses) that range from
about 6000 to over 1,000,000 grams per mole. Proteins perform many functions in the human body. Fibrous proteins provide structural integrity and strength for many types of
tissue and are the main components of muscle, hair, and cartilage. Other proteins, usually
called globular proteins because of their roughly spherical shape, are the “worker” molecules of the body. These proteins transport and store oxygen and nutrients, act as catalysts for the thousands of reactions that make life possible, ﬁght invasion by foreign objects,
participate in the body’s many regulatory systems, and transport electrons in the complex
process of metabolizing nutrients.
The building blocks of all proteins are the ␣-amino acids, where R may represent
H, CH3, or a more complex substituent. These molecules are called ␣-amino acids because the amino group (ONH2) is always attached to the ␣-carbon, the one next to the
carboxyl group (OCO2H). The 20 amino acids most commonly found in proteins are
shown in Fig. 22.18.

1026

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

Nonpolar
R groups

H
O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

CH3 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

Glycine
(Gly)

Alanine
(Ala)

H2
C
H2C

CH2 O
D
J
G
NOC OOC
G
D
A
H
OH
H
Proline
(Pro)

CH3
G
CH2
H3C
G D
CH
O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

C P CH
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

CH3
A
S
A
CH2
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

Isoleucine
(Ile)

Tryptophan
(Trp)

Methionine
(Met)

Polar R groups

OH
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H
Serine
(Ser)

NH2

O
C

CH3

CH2
H2N

NH

C

O

C
OH

H

OH
G D
CH
O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

O
NH2
M D
C
A
CH2
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H
Glutamine
(Gln)

OH

O
C

OH

O
C

CH2

H2N

C

O

C

H
Aspartic acid
(Asp)

OH

SH
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H
Cysteine
(Cys)

CH2
CH2
H2N

C

O

C

H

OH

Glutamic acid
(Glu)

FIGURE 22.18
The 20 a-amino acids found in most proteins. The R group is shown in color.

Phenylalanine
(Phe)

CH3
G D
CH
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

CH3
G D
CH
O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

Leucine
(Leu)

Valine
(Val)

H3C

OH

CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H
Tyrosine
(Tyr)

Threonine
(Thr)

Asparagine
(Asn)

CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

H3C

HCON
B
r
B
CH
B
f
CONH
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H
Histidine
(His)

NH2
A
CH2
A
CH2
A
CH2
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

H2N
NH
G J
C
A
NH
A
CH2
A
CH2
A
CH2 O
A
J
H2NO COC
G
A
OH
H

Lysine
(Lys)

Arginine
(Arg)

22.6 Natural Polymers

At the pH in biological ﬂuids, the amino
acids shown in Fig. 22.18 exist in a different form, with the proton of the
¬COOH group transferred to the ¬NH2
group. For example, glycine would be in
the form H3 NCH2COO.

1027

Note from Fig. 22.18 that the amino acids are grouped into polar and nonpolar
classes, determined by the R groups, or side chains. Nonpolar side chains contain
mostly carbon and hydrogen atoms, whereas polar side chains contain large numbers
of nitrogen and oxygen atoms. This difference is important, because polar side chains
are hydrophilic (water-loving), but nonpolar side chains are hydrophobic (waterfearing), and this characteristic greatly affects the three-dimensional structure of the
resulting protein.
The protein polymer is built by condensation reactions between amino acids. For
example,

The product shown above is called a dipeptide. This name is used because the structure
O H
The peptide linkage is also found in nylon
(see Section 22.5).

C

N

is called a peptide linkage by biochemists. (The same grouping is called an amide by organic chemists.) Additional condensation reactions lengthen the chain to produce a
polypeptide, eventually yielding a protein.
You can imagine that with 20 amino acids, which can be assembled in any order,
there is essentially an inﬁnite variety possible in the construction of proteins. This ﬂexibility allows an organism to tailor proteins for the many types of functions that must be
carried out.
The order, or sequence, of amino acids in the protein chain is called the primary
structure, conveniently indicated by using three-letter codes for the amino acids (see Fig.
22.18), where it is understood that the terminal carboxyl group is on the right and the terminal amino group is on the left. For example, one possible sequence for a tripeptide containing the amino acids lysine, alanine, and leucine is
HC(CH3)2
NH2
A
A
(CH2)4 H CH3
H CH2
A
A A
A A
H2N OC O C O NO COC O NO C OCOOH
A B
A
A B
H O
H O
H
Lysine

Alanine

Leucine

which is represented in the shorthand notation by
lys-ala-leu
A tripeptide containing glycine, cysteine,
and alanine.

Note from Sample Exercise 22.7 that there are six sequences possible for a polypeptide with three given amino acids. There are three possibilities for the ﬁrst amino acid
(any one of the three given amino acids), there are two possibilities for the second amino
acid (one has already been accounted for), but there is only one possibility left for the
third amino acid. Thus the number of sequences is 3  2  1  6. The product 3  2 
1 is often written 3! (and is called 3 factorial). Similar reasoning shows that for a
polypeptide with four amino acids, there are 4!, or 4  3  2  1  24, possible
sequences.

1028

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules
Sample Exercise 22.7

Tripeptide Sequences
Write the sequences of all possible tripeptides composed of the amino acids tyrosine, histidine, and cysteine.
Solution
There are six possible sequences:
tyr-his-cys
tyr-cys-his

his-tyr-cys
his-cys-tyr

cys-tyr-his
cys-his-tyr
See Exercise 22.89.

Sample Exercise 22.8
cys–tyr–ile–gln–asn–cys–pro–leu–gly
(a)

cys–tyr–phe–gln–asn–cys–pro–arg–gly
(b)

Polypeptide Sequences
What number of possible sequences exists for a polypeptide composed of 20 different
amino acids?
Solution
The answer is 20!, or

FIGURE 22.19
The amino acid sequences in (a) oxytocin
and (b) vasopressin. The differing amino
acids are boxed.

20  19  18  17  16  p  5  4  3  2  1  2.43  1018
See Exercise 22.90.

A striking example of the importance of the primary structure of polypeptides can be
seen in the differences between oxytocin and vasopressin. Both of these molecules are
nine-unit polypeptides that differ by only two amino acids (Fig. 22.19), yet they perform
completely different functions in the human body. Oxytocin is a hormone that triggers
contraction of the uterus and milk secretion. Vasopressin raises blood pressure levels and
regulates kidney function.
A second level of structure in proteins, beyond the sequence of amino acids, is the
arrangement of the chain of the long molecule. The secondary structure is determined
to a large extent by hydrogen bonding between lone pairs on an oxygen atom in the carbonyl group of an amino acid and a hydrogen atom attached to a nitrogen of another amino
acid:
Carbon
Nitrogen

FIGURE 22.20
Hydrogen bonding within a protein chain
causes it to form a stable helical structure
called the a -helix. Only the main atoms in
the helical backbone are shown here. The
hydrogen bonds are not shown.

Such interactions can occur within the chain coils to form a spiral structure called an
␣-helix, as shown in Fig. 22.20 and Fig. 22.21. This type of secondary structure gives the
protein elasticity (springiness) and is found in the ﬁbrous proteins in wool, hair, and
tendons. Hydrogen bonding can also occur between different protein chains, joining them
together in an arrangement called a pleated sheet, as shown in Fig. 22.22. Silk contains
this arrangement of proteins, making its ﬁbers ﬂexible yet very strong and resistant to
stretching. The pleated sheet is also found in muscle ﬁbers. The hydrogen bonds in the
␣-helical protein are called intrachain (within a given protein chain), and those in the
pleated sheet are said to be interchain (between protein chains).
As you might imagine, a molecule as large as a protein has a great deal of ﬂexibility and can assume a variety of overall shapes. The speciﬁc shape that a protein assumes
depends on its function. For long, thin structures, such as hair, wool and silk ﬁbers, and
tendons, an elongated shape is required. This may involve an ␣-helical secondary structure, as found in the protein ␣-keratin in hair and wool or in the collagen found in tendons [Fig. 22.23(a)], or it may involve a pleated-sheet secondary structure, as found in

22.6 Natural Polymers

1029

Imaginary axis
of "-helix
R
R

R

Hydrogen
bond

R
Carbon

R

Nitrogen
R
Hydrogen
Oxygen
R

FIGURE 22.21
Ball-and-stick model of a portion of a protein chain in the a -helical arrangement,
showing the hydrogen-bonding interactions.

R

Side chain

R

Hydrogen
bonding

R

R

silk [Fig. 22.23(b)]. Many of the proteins in the body having nonstructural functions are
globular, such as myoglobin (see Fig. 21.31). Note that the secondary structure of
myoglobin is basically ␣-helical. However, in the areas where the chain bends to give the
protein its compact globular structure, the ␣-helix breaks down to give a secondary
conﬁguration known as the random-coil arrangement.

Carbon
Oxygen
Nitrogen
R R group
Hydrogen
Hydrogen bond

FIGURE 22.22
When hydrogen bonding occurs between protein chains rather than within them, a stable structure (the pleated sheet) results. This structure contains many protein chains and is found in
natural ﬁbers, such as silk, and in muscles.

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 22.23
(a) Collagen, a protein found in tendons,
consists of three protein chains (each with
a helical structure) twisted together to form
a superhelix. The result is a long, relatively
narrow protein. (b) The pleated-sheet
arrangement of many proteins bound
together to form the elongated protein
found in silk ﬁbers.

1030

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

H

O

C

H

S

O–

O

S

C

C

O

H

(a)

(b)

H
H

N
+

H

H H H

O

H

H

O

H H H
C

(c)

C

(d)

C

H
H

(e)

FIGURE 22.24
Summary of the various types of interactions that stabilize the tertiary structure of a protein: (a) ionic, (b) hydrogen bonding, (c) covalent,
(d) London dispersion, and (e) dipole–dipole.

Natural cysteine
linkages in hair
S

S

S

S

S

S

S

S

Reduction
SH SH

SH SH

SH SH

SH SH

The overall shape of the protein, long and narrow or globular, is called its tertiary
structure and is maintained by several different types of interactions: hydrogen bonding,
dipole–dipole interactions, ionic bonds, covalent bonds, and London dispersion forces between nonpolar groups. These bonds, which represent all the bonding types discussed in
this text, are summarized in Fig. 22.24.
The amino acid cysteine

Chains shift
HS HS HS
HS HS

HS
HS HS

Hair set in curlers
alters tertiary structures

plays a special role in stabilizing the tertiary structure of many proteins because the OSH
groups on two cysteines can react in the presence of an oxidizing agent to form a SOS
bond called a disulﬁde linkage:

Oxidation
S

S

S

S

S

S

S

S

New cysteine linkages
in waved hair

FIGURE 22.25
The permanent waving of hair.

A practical application of the chemistry of disulﬁde bonds is permanent waving of
hair, as summarized in Fig. 22.25. The SOS linkages in the protein of hair are broken by treatment with a reducing agent. The hair is then set in curlers to change the
tertiary protein structure to the desired shape. Then treatment with an oxidizing agent
causes new SOS bonds to form, which allow the hair protein to retain the new
structure.
The three-dimensional structure of a protein is crucial to its function. The process of
breaking down this structure is called denaturation (Fig. 22.26). For example, the denaturation of egg proteins occurs when an egg is cooked. Any source of energy can cause
denaturation of proteins and is thus potentially dangerous to living organisms. For example,
ultraviolet and X-ray radiation or nuclear radioactivity can disrupt protein structure, which
may lead to cancer or genetic damage. Protein damage is also caused by chemicals like benzene, trichloroethane, and 1,2-dibromoethane. The metals lead and mercury, which have a
very high afﬁnity for sulfur, cause protein denaturation by disrupting disulﬁde bonds between
protein chains.
The tremendous ﬂexibility in the various levels of protein structure allows the tailoring of proteins for a wide range of speciﬁc functions. Proteins are the “workhorse” molecules of living organisms.

22.6 Natural Polymers

1031

Mirror

a

a

C

C
c

b

b

c

d

d

a

a

Energy

C

C
b

d
c

FIGURE 22.26
A schematic representation of the thermal
denaturation of a protein.

c

d
b

FIGURE 22.27
When a tetrahedral carbon atom has four
different substituents, there is no way that
its mirror image can be superimposed. The
lower two forms show other possible orientations of the molecule. Compare these
with the mirror image and note that they
cannot be superimposed.

Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates form another class of biologically important molecules. They serve as a
food source for most organisms and as a structural material for plants. Because many carbohydrates have the empirical formula CH2O, it was originally believed that these substances were hydrates of carbon, thus accounting for the name.
Most important carbohydrates, such as starch and cellulose, are polymers composed
of monomers called monosaccharides, or simple sugars. The monosaccharides are polyhydroxy ketones and aldehydes. The most important contain ﬁve carbon atoms (pentoses)
or six carbon atoms (hexoses). One important hexose is fructose, a sugar found in honey
and fruit. Its structure is
CH2OH
A

C O
A
*
HO O C O H
A

H O*C O OH
A
H O*C O OH
A

CH2OH
Fructose

where the asterisks indicate chiral carbon atoms. In Section 21.4 we saw that molecules
with nonsuperimposable mirror images exhibit optical isomerism. A carbon atom with
four different groups bonded to it in a tetrahedral arrangement always has a nonsuperimposable mirror image (see Fig. 22.27), which gives rise to a pair of optical isomers. For
example, the simplest sugar, glyceraldehyde,

FIGURE 22.28
The mirror image optical isomers of
glyceraldehyde. Note that these mirror
images cannot be superimposed.

which has one chiral carbon, has two optical isomers, as shown in Fig. 22.28.

1032

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

CHEMICAL IMPACT
Tanning in the Shade
mong today’s best-selling cosmetics are self-tanning lotions. Many light-skinned people want to look like they
have just spent a vacation in the Caribbean, but they recognize the dangers of too much sun—it causes premature aging
and may lead to skin cancer. Chemistry has come to the rescue in the form of lotions that produce an authentic-looking
tan. All of these lotions have the same active ingredient:
dihydroxyacetone (DHA). DHA, which has the structure

A

H

H
O C
H

O
C

C

H
OH
H

is a nontoxic, simple sugar that occurs as an intermediate in
carbohydrate metabolism in higher-order plants and animals.
The DHA used in self-tanners is prepared by bacterial fermentation of glycerine,
H

H

H
O C
H

O
C
H

C

H
O
H

H

The tanning effects of DHA were discovered by accident in the 1950s at Children’s Hospital at the University of
Cincinnati, where DHA was being used to treat children with
glycogen storage disease. When the DHA was accidentally
spilled on the skin, it produced brown spots.
The mechanism of the browning process involves the
Maillard reaction, which was discovered by Louis-Camille
Maillard in 1912. In this process amino acids react with sugars to create brown or golden brown products. The same reaction is responsible for much of the browning that occurs
during the manufacture and storage of foods. It is also the
reason that beer is golden brown.
The browning of skin occurs in the stratum corneum—
the outermost, dead layer—where the DHA reacts with free
amino 1¬NH2 2 groups of the proteins found there.
DHA is present in most tanning lotions at concentrations between 2% and 5%, although some products designed
to give a deeper tan are more concentrated. Because the lotions themselves turn brown above pH 7, the tanning lotions
are buffered at pH 5.
Thanks to these new products, tanning is now both safe
and easy.

In fructose each of the three chiral carbon atoms satisﬁes the requirement of being
surrounded by four different groups. This leads to a total of 23, or 8, isomers that differ
in their ability to rotate polarized light. The particular isomer whose structure is shown
in Table 22.8 is called D-fructose. Generally, monosaccharides have one isomer that is
more common in nature than the others. The most important pentoses and hexoses are
shown in Table 22.8.
Sample Exercise 22.9

Chiral Carbons in Carbohydrates
Determine the number of chiral carbon atoms in the following pentose:
H
O
G J
C
A
HOCOOH
A
HOCOOH
A
HOCOOH
A
CH2OH
Solution
We must look for carbon atoms that have four different substituents. The top carbon has
only three substituents and thus cannot be chiral. The three carbon atoms shown in blue

1033

22.6 Natural Polymers

Self-tanning products and a close-up of a label showing the contents.

General Name
of Sugar
Triose
Tetrose
Pentose
Hexose
Heptose
Octose
Nonose

Number of
Carbon Atoms

TABLE 22.8

Some Important Monosaccharides
Pentoses

3
4
5
6
7
8
9

D-Ribose

D-Arabinose

D-Ribulose

CHO

CHO

CH2OH
A

A

A

CPO

HOOCOH

HOCOOH

A

A

A

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

CH2OH

CH2OH

CH2OH

A

A

A

A

A

A

Hexoses
D-Glucose

CHO
A

HOCOOH
A

HOOCOH
A

D-Mannose

D-Galactose

D-Fructose

CH2OH

CH2OH

HOOCOH

COO

COO

HOOCOH

HOOCOH

HOOCOH

CHO
A

A
A

A

A
A

A

A
A

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

HOCOOH

CH2OH

CH2OH

CH2OH

CH2OH

A
A

A
A

A
A

A
A

1034

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules
each have four different groups attached to them:
H
O
G J
C
A
HO COOH
A
HO COOH
A
HO COOH
A
CH2OH

HOC PO
A
HOC OOH
A
HOC OOH
A
HOCOOH
A
CH2OH

HO CPO
A
HO COOH
A
HO COOH
A
HO COOH
A
CH2OH

Since the ﬁfth carbon atom has only three types of substituents (it has two hydrogen
atoms), it is not chiral.
Thus the three chiral carbon atoms in this pentose are those shown in blue:
H
O
G J
C
A
HOCOOH
A
HOCOOH
A
HOCOOH
A
CH2OH
Note that D-ribose and D-arabinose, shown in Table 22.8, are two of the eight isomers of
this pentose.
See Exercises 22.108 and 22.113 through 22.116.

FIGURE 22.29
The cyclization of D-fructose.

Although we have so far represented the monosaccharides as straight-chain molecules,
they usually cyclize, or form a ring structure, in aqueous solution. Figure 22.29 shows
this reaction for fructose. Note that a new bond is formed between the oxygen of the terminal hydroxyl group and the carbon of the ketone group. In the cyclic form fructose is
a ﬁve-membered ring containing a COOOC bond. The same type of reaction can occur
between a hydroxyl group and an aldehyde group, as shown for D-glucose in Fig. 22.30.
In this case a six-membered ring is formed.
More complex carbohydrates are formed by combining monosaccharides. For example,
sucrose, common table sugar, is a disaccharide formed from glucose and fructose by
elimination of water to form a COOOC bond between the rings, which is called a
glycoside linkage (Fig. 22.31). When sucrose is consumed in food, the above reaction is
reversed. An enzyme in saliva catalyzes the breakdown of this disaccharide.
Large polymers consisting of many monosaccharide units, called polysaccharides, can
form when each ring forms two glycoside linkages, as shown in Fig. 22.32. Three of the
most important of these polymers are starch, cellulose, and glycogen. All these substances
are polymers of glucose, differing from each other in the nature of the glycoside linkage,
the amount of branching, and molecular weight (molar mass).
Starch, a polymer of ␣-D-glucose, consists of two parts: amylose, a straightchain polymer of ␣-glucose [see Fig. 22.32(a)], and amylopectin, a highly branched polymer of ␣-glucose with a molecular weight that is 10 to 20 times that of amylose. Branching occurs when a third glycoside linkage attaches a branch to the main polymer chain.
Starch, the carbohydrate reservoir in plants, is the form in which glucose is stored by
the plant for later use as cellular fuel. Glucose is stored in this high-molecular-weight form
because it results in less stress on the plant’s internal structure by osmotic pressure. Recall

1035

22.6 Natural Polymers
CH2OH

H

C

O

H

H
C
OH
HO

O

H

C

C
H

C

H

OH

CH2OH

CH2OH

C

H

O

H
C
OH
HO

H

OH

C

H

HO

OH

H
HO

CH2OH
H
OH

OH

H

C

C
H

C

H

"

FIGURE 22.30
The cyclization of glucose. Two different
rings are possible; they differ in the orientation of the hydroxy group and hydrogen
on one carbon, as indicated. The two forms
are designated ␣ and ␤ and are shown here
in two representations.

O

H
C
OH

C

H

C

C

H

OH

#
H

O
H

HO
H

OH

H

OH

CH2OH

O
H

H
OH

OH
OH

H

"

H

#

from Section 11.6 that it is the concentration of solute molecules (or ions) that determines
the osmotic pressure. Combining the individual glucose molecules into one large chain keeps
the concentration of solute molecules relatively low, minimizing the osmotic pressure.
Cellulose, the major structural component of woody plants and natural ﬁbers (such
as cotton), is a polymer of ␤-D-glucose and has the structure shown in Fig. 22.32(b). Note
that the ␤-glycoside linkages in cellulose give the glucose rings a different relative orientation than is found in starch. Although this difference may seem minor, it has very important consequences. The human digestive system contains ␣-glycosidases, enzymes that
can catalyze breakage of the ␣-glycoside bonds in starch. These enzymes are not effective on the ␤-glycoside bonds of cellulose, presumably because the different structure
Bowl of sugar cubes.

H
C
HO

CH2OH
C
H OH
C
H

O
H

CH2OH

H

C

C

C

OH

OH

H

HO

"-D-glucose

O

H
OH

C

C
CH2OH

C

OH

H
Fructose

–H2O
H
C
HO

CH2OH
C
H OH
C

FIGURE 22.31
Sucrose is a disaccharide formed from
␣-D-glucose and fructose.

+H2O

O
H
C

CH2OH

H

C

C

OH

H

O

H
Glycoside
linkage

C
OH

Sucrose

O

H
OH

C
CH2OH

C
H

1036
H
HO

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

CH2OH
H
OH

O
H
HH
OH

O

H

CH2OH
H
OH

O
H
HH
OH

O

H

CH2OH
H
OH

O
H
HH
OH

O

H

CH2OH
H
OH

(a)

O
H
H
OH

O

H

H
O

H
CH2OH
H
OH

HO

O
H

H OH
O

OH

H

H H

CH2OH

H

H H
O

H
CH2OH
H
OH

O
H

HO

O
H

H OH
O

OH

H

H

CH2OH

H

H
O

O

(b)

FIGURE 22.32
(a) The polymer amylose is a major component of starch and is made up of a -D-glucose monomers. (b) The
polymer cellulose, which consists of ␤-D-glucose monomers.

results in a poor ﬁt between the enzyme’s active site and the carbohydrate. The enzymes
necessary to cleave ␤-glycoside linkages, the ␤-glycosidases, are found in bacteria that
exist in the digestive tracts of termites, cows, deer, and many other animals. Thus, unlike
humans, these animals can derive nutrition from cellulose.
Glycogen, the main carbohydrate reservoir in animals, has a structure similar to that
of amylopectin but with more branching. It is this branching that is thought to facilitate
the rapid breakdown of glycogen into glucose when energy is required.

Nucleic Acids
CH2OH
C H
H
C
OH

OH
H C
H

C
H

Deoxyribose

(a)

CH2OH O
C H
H

C
OH

OH
H C
H

C
OH

Ribose

(b)

FIGURE 22.33
The structure of the pentoses (a) deoxyribose and (b) ribose. Deoxyribose is the
sugar molecule present in DNA; ribose is
found in RNA.

Life is possible only because each cell, when it divides, can transmit the vital
information about how it works to the next generation. It has been known for a long
time that this process involves the chromosomes in the nucleus of the cell. Only since
1953, however, have scientists understood the molecular basis of this intriguing cellular “talent.”
The substance that stores and transmits the genetic information is a polymer called
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), a huge molecule with a molecular weight as high as several billion grams per mole. Together with other similar nucleic acids called the ribonucleic acids (RNA), DNA is also responsible for the synthesis of the various proteins needed
by the cell to carry out its life functions. The RNA molecules, which are found in the cytoplasm outside the nucleus, are much smaller than DNA polymers, with molecular weights
of only 20,000 to 40,000 grams per mole.
The monomers of the nucleic acids, called nucleotides, are composed of three distinct parts:
1. A ﬁve-carbon sugar, deoxyribose in DNA and ribose in RNA (Fig. 22.33)
2. A nitrogen-containing organic base of the type shown in Fig. 22.34
3. A phosphoric acid molecule (H3PO4)

1037

22.6 Natural Polymers
O
HN

N
N
H

O

O

NH2

N
H

O

Uracil (U)
RNA

Thymine (T)
DNA

O

NH2
N
N
H

N

N
H

O

Cytosine (C)
DNA
RNA

N

CH3

HN

Adenine (A)
DNA
RNA

N

HN
H2N

N
H

N
Guanine (G)
DNA
RNA

FIGURE 22.34
The organic bases found in DNA and RNA.

A computer image of the base pairs of
DNA. The blue lines represent the
sugar–phosphate backbone and the colored
bars represent the hydrogen bonding
between the base pairs.

The base and the sugar combine as shown in Fig. 22.35(a) to form a unit that in turn reacts with phosphoric acid to create the nucleotide, which is an ester [see Fig. 22.35(b)].
The nucleotides become connected through condensation reactions that eliminate water
to give a polymer of the type represented in Fig. 22.36; such a polymer can contain a billion units.

NH2
N
N

Adenine

NH2
N
H

O

HOCH2
C
H

OH
H

H
C

N

H2 O

O

HOCH2

C

C
H

C

OH

N

N

H

OH

H

H

C

C

OH

Ribose

(a)

N

N
C
H

OH
Adenosine

NH2

NH2

N

H2 O

N
N

N

OH
HO

P

OH
O

H

H

O
Phosphoric acid

O

O

CH2
C
H

H

H

C

C

OH
(b)

N

HO

P

O

H

O

CH2

O

C

OH
Adenosine

N

C
H

N

H

H

C

C

N

C
H

OH
OH
Adenosine 5-phosphoric acid

FIGURE 22.35
(a) Adenosine is formed by the reaction of adenine with ribose. (b) The reaction of phosphoric acid with adenosine to form the ester adenosine
5-phosphoric acid, a nucleotide. (At biological pH, the phosphoric acid would not be fully protonated as is shown here.)

1038

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

P
O
CH2 O

Base

C H
H

H C

C

H

C
H

O
HO

P

O

O
CH2 O
C H
H

Base

H C

C

H

C
H

O
HO

P

Repeating
unit along
DNA
chain

O

O
CH2 O
C H
H

Base

H C

C

H

C
H

O
HO

P

The key to DNA’s functioning is its double-helical structure with complementary
bases on the two strands. The bases form hydrogen bonds to each other, as shown in Fig.
22.37. Note that the structures of cytosine and guanine make them perfect partners for
hydrogen bonding, and they are always found as pairs on the two strands of DNA. Thymine
and adenine form similar hydrogen-bonding pairs.
There is much evidence to suggest that the two strands of DNA unwind during cell
division and that new complementary strands are constructed on the unraveled strands
(Fig. 22.38). Because the bases on the strands always pair in the same way—cytosine with
guanine and thymine with adenine—each unraveled strand serves as a template for attaching the complementary bases (along with the rest of the nucleotide). This process results in two double-helix DNA structures that are identical to the original one. Each new
double strand contains one strand from the original DNA double helix and one newly synthesized strand. This replication of DNA allows for the transmission of genetic information as the cells divide.
The other major function of DNA is protein synthesis. A given segment of the DNA,
called a gene, contains the code for a speciﬁc protein. These codes transmit the primary
structure of the protein (the sequence of amino acids) to the construction “machinery” of
the cell. There is a speciﬁc code for each amino acid in the protein, which ensures that
the correct amino acid will be inserted as the protein chain grows. A code consists of a
set of three bases called a codon.
DNA stores the genetic information, while RNA molecules are responsible for transmitting this information to the ribosomes, where protein synthesis actually occurs. This
complex process involves, ﬁrst, the construction of a special RNA molecule called messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA is built in the cell nucleus on the appropriate section
of DNA (the gene); the double helix is “unzipped,” and the complementarity of the bases

O

O
CH2 O
C H
H

C

H C

P

H

C

C

A

T
G

H
CH3

C

H

O
HO

G
Base

A

O

O

O

Adenine
N

H

G
T

A

A
C

T
T

T

(a)

N

N
N

O

Deoxyribose

H

(b)

G

H

C

H

N

H

H

N

O

A
N

H

A
Cytosine

T

H

N

Thymine

Deoxyribose

FIGURE 22.36
A portion of a typical nucleic acid chain.
Note that the backbone consists of
sugar–phosphate esters.

H

N

N

T
C

G

H

(c)

N

N

N

Deoxyribose

A

H

N
O

H

Guanine

Deoxyribose

N
H

FIGURE 22.37
(a) The DNA double helix contains two sugar–phosphate backbones, with the bases from the two
strands hydrogen-bonded to each other. The complementarity of the (b) thymine-adenine and
(c) cytosine-guanine pairs.

22.6 Natural Polymers
Old

G

C

T

Old
A
C G
A T
C

T
C G
A T

1039

G
A

A T
G C
C G
T

G
C

A
A T

T A
G

C

A

T
New

T
C

New

A T
G C
C

A
G
A T
G C
C

G
T

A

G
T

A T
A

FIGURE 22.38
During cell division the original DNA double helix unwinds and new complementary
strands are constructed on each original
strand.

A
Old

G
T

T
C

C
A

A

T
G

A
New

New

A
A T

G
T

T
C

C
A

T
G

Old

is used in a process similar to that used in DNA replication. The mRNA then migrates
into the cytoplasm of the cell where, with the assistance of the ribosomes, the protein is
synthesized.
Small RNA fragments, called transfer RNA (tRNA), are tailored to ﬁnd speciﬁc
amino acids and then to attach them to the growing protein chain as dictated by the
codons in the mRNA. Transfer RNA has a lower molecular weight than messenger
RNA. It consists of a chain of 75 to 80 nucleotides, including the bases adenine, cytosine, guanine, and uracil, among others. The chain folds back onto itself in various
places as the complementary bases along the chain form hydrogen bonds. The tRNA
decodes the genetic message from the mRNA, using a complementary triplet of bases
called an anticodon. The nature of the anticodon governs which amino acid will be
brought to the protein under construction.
The protein is built in several steps. First, a tRNA molecule brings an amino acid to
the mRNA [the anticodon of the tRNA must complement the codon of the mRNA (see
Fig. 22.39)]. Once this amino acid is in place, another tRNA moves to the second codon
site of the mRNA with its speciﬁc amino acid. The two amino acids link via a peptide
bond, and the tRNA on the ﬁrst codon breaks away. The process is repeated down the
chain, always matching the tRNA anticodon with the mRNA codon.

1040

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

Nucleus
DNA

RNA
Ribosome moves
along mRNA

+

mRNA
Ribosome

Amino
acid
(as specified by mRNA)
tRNA

+

Completed
protein

Growing
polypeptide
chain

FIGURE 22.39
The mRNA molecule, constructed from a speciﬁc gene on the DNA, is used as the pattern to construct a given protein with the assistance of
ribosomes. The tRNA molecules attach to speciﬁc amino acids and put them in place as called for by the codons on the mRNA.

Key Terms
biomolecule
organic chemistry

Section 22.1
hydrocarbons
saturated
unsaturated
alkanes
normal (straight-chain or unbranched)
hydrocarbons
structural isomerism
combustion reaction
substitution reaction
dehydrogenation reaction
cyclic alkanes

Section 22.2
alkenes
cis–trans isomerism
alkynes
addition reaction
hydrogenation reaction
halogenation
polymerization

Section 22.3
aromatic hydrocarbons
phenyl group

Section 22.4
hydrocarbon derivatives
functional group
alcohols
phenol
carbonyl group

For Review
Hydrocarbons
䊉 Compounds composed of mostly carbon and hydrogen atoms that typically contain
chains or rings of carbon atoms
䊉 Alkanes
• Contain compounds with only C¬C single bonds
• Can be represented by the formula CnH2n2
• Are said to be saturated because each carbon present is bonded to the maximum
number of atoms (4)
• The carbon atoms are described as being sp3 hybridized
• Their structural isomerism involves the formation of branched chains
• React with O2 to form CO2 and H2O (called a combustion reaction)
• Undergo substitution reactions
䊉 Alkenes
• Contain one or more C“C double bonds
• Simplest alkene is C2H4 (ethylene) which is described as containing sp2 hybridized carbon atoms
• Restricted rotation about the C“C bonds in alkenes can lead to cis–trans
isomerism
• Undergo addition reactions
䊉 Alkynes
• Contain one or more C‚C triple bonds
• Simplest example is C2H2 (acetylene), described as containing sp-hybridized carbon atoms
• Undergo addition reactions
䊉 Aromatic hydrocarbons
• Contain rings of carbon atoms with delocalized p electrons
• Undergo substitution reactions rather than addition reactions

For Review
ketones
aldehydes
carboxylic acids
carboxyl group
ester
amines

Section 22.5
polymers
thermoset polymer
thermoplastic polymer
crosslinking
vulcanization
addition polymerization
free radical
condensation polymerization
copolymer
homopolymer
dimer
polyester
isotactic chain
syndiotactic chain
atactic chain
polystyrene
polyvinyl chloride (PVC)

Section 22.6
proteins
ﬁbrous proteins
globular proteins
␣-amino acids
side chains
dipeptide
peptide linkage
polypeptide
primary structure
secondary structure
␣-helix
pleated sheet
random-coil arrangement
tertiary structure
disulﬁde linkage
denaturation
carbohydrates
monosaccharides (simple sugars)
pentoses
hexoses
sucrose
disaccharide
glycoside linkage
starch
cellulose
glycogen
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
ribonucleic acid (RNA)
nucleotides
protein synthesis
gene
codon

1041

Hydrocarbon derivatives
䊉 Contain one or more functional groups
䊉 Alcohols: contain the ¬OH group
䊉 Aldehydes: contain a
group
C O
H
䊉 Ketones: contain the
group
C O
䊉

Carboxylic acids: contain the

group

Polymers
䊉 Large molecules formed from many small molecules (called monomers)
• Addition polymerization: monomers add together by a free radical mechanism
• Condensation polymerization: monomers connect by splitting out a small molecule, such as water
Proteins
䊉 A class of natural polymers with molar masses ranging from 600 to 1,000,000
䊉 Fibrous proteins form the structural basis of muscle, hair, and cartilage
䊉 Globular proteins perform many biologic functions, including transport and storage of oxygen, catalysis of biologic reactions, and regulation of biologic systems
䊉 Building blocks of proteins (monomers) are a-amino acids, which connect by a
condensation reaction to form a peptide linkage
䊉 Protein structure
• Primary: the order of amino acids in the chain
• Secondary: the arrangement of the protein chain
• a-helix
• pleated sheet
• Tertiary structure: the overall shape of the protein
Carbohydrates
䊉 Contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
䊉 Serve as food sources for most organisms
䊉 Monosaccharides are most commonly ﬁve-carbon and six-carbon polyhydroxy
ketones and aldehydes
• Monosaccharides combine to form more complex carbohydrates, such as sucrose, starch, and cellulose
Genetic processes
䊉 When a cell divides, the genetic information is transmitted via deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA), which has a double helical structure
• During cell division, the double helix unravels and a new polymer forms along
each strand of the original DNA
• The genetic code is carried by organic bases that hydrogen-bond to each other in
speciﬁc pairs in the interior of the DNA double helix

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is a hydrocarbon? What is the difference between a saturated hydrocarbon
and an unsaturated hydrocarbon? Distinguish between normal and branched hydrocarbons. What is an alkane? What is a cyclic alkane? What are the two general formulas for alkanes? What is the hybridization of carbon atoms in alkanes? What are
the bond angles in alkanes? Why are cyclopropane and cyclobutane so reactive?

1042

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

messenger RNA (mRNA)
transfer RNA (tRNA)
anticodon

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

The normal (unbranched) hydrocarbons are often referred to as straight-chain
hydrocarbons. What does this name refer to? Does it mean that the carbon atoms
in a straight-chain hydrocarbon really have a linear arrangement? Explain. In the
shorthand notation for cyclic alkanes, the hydrogens are usually omitted. How do
you determine the number of hydrogens bonded to each carbon in a ring structure?
What is an alkene? What is an alkyne? What are the general formulas for
alkenes and alkynes, assuming one multiple bond in each? What are the bond
angles in alkenes and alkynes? Describe the bonding in alkenes and alkynes using C2H4 and C2H2 as your examples. Why is there restricted rotation in alkenes
and alkynes? Is the general formula for a cyclic alkene CnH2n? If not, what is
the general formula, assuming one multiple bond?
What are aromatic hydrocarbons? Benzene exhibits resonance. Explain. What
are the bond angles in benzene? Give a detailed description of the bonding in
benzene. The p electrons in benzene are delocalized, while the p electrons in
alkenes and alkynes are localized. Explain the difference.
Summarize the nomenclature rules for alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, and aromatic
compounds. Correct the following false statements regarding nomenclature of
hydrocarbons.
a. The root name for a hydrocarbon is based on the shortest continuous chain of
carbon atoms.
b. The sufﬁx used to name all hydrocarbons is -ane.
c. Substituent groups are numbered so as to give the largest numbers possible.
d. No number is required to indicate the positions of double or triple bonds in
alkenes and alkynes.
e. Substituent groups get the lowest number possible in alkenes and alkynes.
f. The ortho- term in aromatic hydrocarbons indicates the presence of two
substituent groups bonded to carbon-1 and carbon-3 in benzene.
What functional group distinguishes each of the following hydrocarbon
derivatives?
a. halohydrocarbons
b. alcohols
c. ethers
d. aldehydes
e. ketones
f. carboxylic acids
g. esters
h. amines
Give examples of each functional group. What preﬁx or sufﬁx is used to name
each functional group? What are the bond angles in each? Describe the bonding
in each functional group. What is the difference between a primary, secondary,
and tertiary alcohol? For the functional groups in a–h, when is a number required
to indicate the position of the functional group? Carboxylic acids are often
written as RCOOH. What does ¬COOH indicate and what does R indicate?
Aldehydes are sometimes written as RCHO. What does ¬CHO indicate?
Distinguish between isomerism and resonance. Distinguish between structural
and geometric isomerism. When writing the various structural isomers, the most
difﬁcult task is identifying which are different isomers and which are identical
to a previously written structure—that is, which are compounds that differ only
by the rotation of a carbon single bond. How do you distinguish between structural isomers and those that are identical?
Alkenes and cycloalkanes are structural isomers of each other. Give an
example of each using C4H10. Another common feature of alkenes and cycloalkanes

For Review

1043

is that both have restricted rotation about one or more bonds in the compound,
so both can exhibit cis–trans isomerism. What is required for an alkene or cycloalkane to exhibit cis–trans isomerism? Explain the difference between cis and
trans isomers.
Alcohols and ethers are structural isomers of each other, as are aldehydes
and ketones. Give an example of each to illustrate. Which functional group in
Table 22.4 can be structural isomers of carboxylic acids?
What is optical isomerism? What do you look for to determine whether an
organic compound exhibits optical isomerism? 1-Bromo-1-chloroethane is optically active whereas 1-bromo-2-chloroethane is not optically active. Explain.
7. What type of intermolecular forces do hydrocarbons exhibit? Explain why the
boiling point of n-heptane is greater than that of n-butane. A general rule for a
group of hydrocarbon isomers is that as the amount of branching increases, the
boiling point decreases. Explain why this would be true.
The functional groups listed in Table 22.4 all exhibit London dispersion forces,
but they also usually exhibit additional dipole–dipole forces. Explain why this is the
case for each functional group. Although alcohols and ethers are structural isomers
of each other, alcohols always boil at signiﬁcantly higher temperatures than similarsize ethers. Explain. What would you expect when comparing the boiling points of
similar-size carboxylic acids to esters? CH3CH2CH3, CH3CH2OH, CH3CHO, and
HCOOH all have about the same molar mass, but they boil at very different temperatures. Why? Place these compounds in order by increasing boiling point.
8. Distinguish between substitution and addition reactions. Give an example of each
type of reaction. Alkanes and aromatics are fairly stable compounds. To make
them react, a special catalyst must be present. What catalyst must be present
when reacting Cl2 with an alkane or with benzene? Adding Cl2 to an alkene or
alkyne does not require a special catalyst. Why are alkenes and alkynes more reactive than alkanes and aromatic compounds? All organic compounds can be
combusted. What is the other reactant in a combustion reaction, and what are the
products, assuming the organic compound contains only C, H, and perhaps O?
The following are some other organic reactions covered in Section 22.4.
Give an example to illustrate each type of reaction.
a. Adding H2O to an alkene (in the presence of H) yields an alcohol.
b. Primary alcohols are oxidized to aldehydes, which can be further oxidized to
carboxylic acids.
c. Secondary alcohols are oxidized to ketones.
d. Reacting an alcohol with a carboxylic acid (in the presence of H) produces
an ester.
9. Deﬁne and give an example of each of the following.
a. addition polymer
b. condensation polymer
c. copolymer
d. homopolymer
e. polyester
f. polyamide
Distinguish between a thermoset polymer and a thermoplastic polymer. How do
the physical properties of polymers depend on chain length and extent of chain
branching? Explain how crosslinking agents are used to change the physical
properties of polymers. Isotactic polypropylene makes stronger ﬁbers than
atactic polypropylene. Explain. In which polymer, polyethylene or polyvinyl
chloride, would you expect to ﬁnd the stronger intermolecular forces (assuming
the average chain lengths are equal)?

1044

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

10. Give the general formula for an amino acid. Some amino acids are labeled hydrophilic and some are labeled hydrophobic. What do these terms refer to?
Aqueous solutions of amino acids are buffered solutions. Explain. Most of the
amino acids in Fig. 22.18 are optically active. Explain. What is a peptide bond?
Show how glycine, serine, and alanine react to form a tripeptide. What is a protein, and what are the monomers in proteins? Distinguish between the primary,
secondary, and tertiary structures of a protein. Give examples of the types of
forces that maintain each type of structure. Describe how denaturation affects
the function of a protein.
What are carbohydrates, and what are the monomers in carbohydrates? The
monosaccharides in Table 22.8 are all optically active. Explain. What is a disaccharide? Which monosaccharide units make up the disaccharide sucrose? What
do you call the bond that forms between the monosaccharide units? What forces
are responsible for the solubility of starch in water? What is the difference between starch, cellulose, and glycogen?
Describe the structural differences between DNA and RNA. The monomers
in nucleic acids are called nucleotides. What are the three parts of a nucleotide?
The compounds adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine are called the nucleic
acid bases. What structural features in these compounds make them bases? DNA
exhibits a double-helical structure. Explain. Describe how the complementary
base pairing between the two individual strands of DNA forms the overall
double-helical structure. How is complementary base pairing involved in the
replication of DNA molecule during cell division? Describe how protein synthesis occurs. What is a codon, and what is a gene? The deletion of a single base
from a DNA molecule can constitute a fatal mutation, whereas substitution of
one base for another is often not as serious a mutation. Explain.

A blue question or exercise number indicates that the answer to that
question or exercise appears at the back of this book and a solution appears
in the Solutions Guide.

4.

Questions
1. A confused student was doing an isomer problem and listed the
following six names as different structural isomers of C7H16.
a. 1-sec-butylpropane
b. 4-methylhexane
c. 2-ethylpentane
d. 1-ethyl-1-methylbutane
e. 3-methylhexane
f. 4-ethylpentane
How many different structural isomers are actually present in
these six names?
2. For the following formulas, what types of isomerism could be
exhibited? For each formula, give an example that illustrates the
speciﬁc type of isomerism. The types of isomerism are structural, geometric, and optical.
a. C6H12
b. C5H12O
c. C6H4Br2
3. What is wrong with the following names? Give the correct name
for each compound.
a. 2-ethylpropane
b. 5-iodo-5, 6-dimethylhexane

5.

6.

7.

c. cis-4-methyl-3-pentene
d. 2-bromo-3-butanol
The following organic compounds cannot exist. Why?
a. 2-chloro-2-butyne
b. 2-methyl-2-propanone
c. 1,l-dimethylbenzene
d. 2-pentanal
e. 3-hexanoic acid
f. 5,5-dibromo-1-cyclobutanol
If you had a group of hydrocarbons, what structural features
would you look at to rank the hydrocarbons in order of increasing boiling point?
Which of the functional groups in Table 22.4 can exhibit
hydrogen bonding intermolecular forces? Can CH2CF2 exhibit
hydrogen bonding? Explain.
A polypeptide is also called a polyamide. What is a polyamide?
Consider a polyhydrocarbon, a polyester, and a polyamide. Assuming average chain lengths are equal, which polymer would
you expect to make the strongest ﬁbers and which polymer would
you expect to make the weakest ﬁbers? Explain.

8. Give an example reaction that would yield the following
products. Name the organic reactant and product in each reaction.
a. alkane
b. monohalogenated alkane

Exercises

9.

10.

11.

12.

c. dihalogenated alkane
d. tetrahalogenated alkane
e. monohalogenated benzene
f. alkene
Give an example reaction that would yield the following products as major organic products. See Exercises 22.62 and 22.65
for some hints. For oxidation reactions, just write oxidation over
the arrow and don’t worry about the actual reagent.
a. primary alcohol
b. secondary alcohol
c. tertiary alcohol
d. aldehyde
e. ketone
f. carboxylic acid
g. ester
What is polystyrene? The following processes result in a stronger
polystyrene polymer. Explain why in each case.
a. addition of catalyst to form syndiotactic polystyrene
b. addition of 1,3-butadiene and sulfur
c. producing long chains of polystyrene
d. addition of a catalyst to make linear polystyrene
Answer the following questions regarding the formation of polymers.
a. What structural features must be present in a monomer in order to form a homopolymer polyester?
b. What structural features must be present in the monomers in
order to form a copolymer polyamide?
c. What structural features must be present in a monomer
that can form both an addition polymer and a condensation
polymer?
In Section 22.6, three important classes of biologically important natural polymers are discussed. What are the three classes,
what are the monomers used to form the polymers, and why are
they biologically important?

Exercises

1045

19. Draw the structural formula for each of the following.
a. 3-isobutylhexane
b. 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, also called isooctane. This substance
is the reference (100 level) for octane ratings.
c. 2-tert-butylpentane
d. The names given in parts a and c are incorrect. Give the correct names for these hydrocarbons.
20. Draw the structure for 4-ethyl-2,3-diisopropylpentane. This
name is incorrect. Give the correct systematic name.
21. Name each of the following:
a.
CH3
CH3
b. CH2

C

CH2

CH3
CH2

CH

CH2

CH3
c.

C

CH2

C

CH3
d.

C

CH2

CH2

CH2
CH3

CH3

CH3

CH2
CH3

CH3
CH

CH3

CH3
CH3

CH3
CH3

CH2

CH3
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH3

CH2 CH3
22. Name each of the following cyclic alkanes, and indicate the formula of the compound.
a.
CHCH3
CH3
b.

CH3

CCH3
CH3

CH3
c. CH3

CH2CH2CH3

In this section similar exercises are paired.

CH3

Hydrocarbons

15. Draw all the structural isomers for C8H18 that have the following
root name (longest carbon chain). Name the structural isomers.
a. heptane
b. butane
16. Draw all the structural isomers for C8H18 that have the following
root name (longest carbon chain). Name the structural isomers.
a. hexane
b. pentane
17. Draw a structural formula for each of the following compounds.
a. 2-methylpropane
b. 2-methylbutane
c. 2-methylpentane
d. 2-methylhexane
18. Draw a structural formula for each of the following compounds.
a. 2,2-dimethylheptane
c. 3,3-dimethylheptane
b. 2,3-dimethylheptane
d. 2,4-dimethylheptane

23. Give two examples of saturated hydrocarbons. How many other
atoms are bonded to each carbon in a saturated hydrocarbon?
24. Draw the structures for two examples of unsaturated hydrocarbons. What structural feature makes a hydrocarbon unsaturated?
25. Name each of the following alkenes.
a. CH2PCHOCH2OCH3
b.
CH2CH3
c.

CH3 CH CH CHCH3
CH3
A
CH3CH2CHOCH CHOCHCH3
A
CH3
B

13. Draw the ﬁve structural isomers of hexane (C6H14).
14. Name the structural isomers in Exercise 13.

26. Name each of the following alkenes or alkynes.
a.
CH3 CH3
CH3 C

C

CH3

1046

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

b. CH3

CH3

C

CH

C

c. CH2

C

CH

CH3

29. Give the structure of each of the following aromatic hydrocarbons.
a. o-ethyltoluene
b. p-di-tert-butylbenzene
c. m-diethylbenzene
d. 1-phenyl-2-butene
30. Cumene is the starting material for the industrial production of
acetone and phenol. The structure of cumene is
CH3
A
CH
A
CH3
Give the systematic name for cumene.
31. Name each of the following.
a. Cl O CH2O CH2OCHOCH3
A
Cl
b. CH3CH2CH2CCl3
c. CH3
G
CClOCHO CHOCH3
D
A
A
CH3
Cl CH OCH
2

Cl
b. CH3
CH2CH3
Cl
CH2CH2CH3
CH3

CH3

CH3
Br

Br

Isomerism
33. There is only one compound that is named 1,2-dichloroethane,
but there are two distinct compounds that can be named
1,2-dichloroethene. Why?
34. Consider the following four structures:
H3C

D

D

G

G

CPC

H

H3C
H

D
G

H

H
CPC

D

G
H
(i)

G

H

D

CPC

D

CPC
D
G
G

H
H3C

D
G

CPC

H

H3C
H

H

H

G

H
CPC

D

D
D
CPC
D
G

G

G

CPC

H

D

G
H
(ii)

H

(iii)

D
G

H
H

H
H

H
(iv)

a. Which of these compounds would have the same physical
properties (melting point, boiling point, density, and so on)?
b. Which of these compounds is (are) trans isomers?
c. Which of these compounds do not exhibit cis–trans isomerism?

3

d. CH2FCH2F
32. Name each of the following compounds.
a. CH3CHCH CH2

e. CH3

g. CH3

CH3

27. Give the structure for each of the following.
a. 3-hexene
b. 2,4-heptadiene
c. 2-methyl-3-octene
28. Give the structure for each of the following.
a. 4-methyl-1-pentyne
b. 2,3,3-trimethyl-1-hexene
c. 3-ethyl-4-decene

d.

Br

CH2 CH3

CH3 CH2

c.

f. CH3

35. Which of the compounds in Exercises 25 and 27 exhibit cis–trans
isomerism?
36. Which of the compounds in Exercises 26 and 28 exhibit cis–trans
isomerism?
37. Draw all the structural isomers of C5H10. Ignore any cyclic isomers.
38. Which of the structural isomers in Exercise 37 exhibit cis–trans
isomerism?
39. Draw all the structural and geometrical (cis–trans) isomers of
C3H5Cl.
40. Draw all the structural and geometrical (cis–trans) isomers of
bromochloropropene.
41. Draw all structural and geometrical (cis–trans) isomers of C4H7F.
Ignore any cyclic isomers.
42. Cis–trans isomerism is also possible in molecules with rings.
Draw the cis and trans isomers of 1,2-dimethylcyclohexane. In
Exercise 41, you drew all of the noncyclic structural and
geometric isomers of C4H7F. Now draw the cyclic structural and
geometric isomers of C4H7F.
43. Draw the following.
a. cis-2-hexene
b. trans-2-butene
c. cis-2,3-dichloro-2-pentene

Exercises
44. Name the following compounds.
a. CH3
Br

b.

C
H
CH3

C
H

48. Identify the functional groups present in the following compounds.
a.
OH
CH3

CH2CH3
C

1047

CH3

C

CH3CH2
c.
I

CH2CH2CH3
O

CH3CHCH2

H
C

C

CH3CH2CH2

Testosterone

b. CH3O

I

45. If one hydrogen in a hydrocarbon is replaced by a halogen atom,
the number of isomers that exist for the substituted compound
depends on the number of types of hydrogen in the original
hydrocarbon. Thus there is only one form of chloroethane (all
hydrogens in ethane are equivalent), but there are two isomers
of propane that arise from the substitution of a methyl hydrogen
or a methylene hydrogen. How many isomers can be obtained
when one hydrogen in each of the compounds named below is
replaced by a chlorine atom?
a. n-pentane
c. 2,4-dimethylpentane
b. 2-methylbutane
d. methylcyclobutane
46. There are three isomers of dichlorobenzene, one of which has
now replaced naphthalene as the main constituent of mothballs.
a. Identify the ortho, the meta, and the para isomers of dichlorobenzene.
b. Predict the number of isomers for trichlorobenzene.
c. It turns out that the presence of one chlorine atom on a benzene ring will cause the next substituent to add ortho or para
to the ﬁrst chlorine atom on the benzene ring. What does this
tell you about the synthesis of m-dichlorobenzene?
d. Which of the isomers of trichlorobenzene will be the hardest
to prepare?

Functional Groups
47. Identify each of the following compounds as a carboxylic acid,
ester, ketone, aldehyde, or amine.
a. Anthraquinone, an important starting material in the manufacture of dyes:

O

HO

CH
Vanillin

O

c.
O
H2 N

CH
CH2

C

C
NH

C

OCH3

CHCH2

OH

O
Aspartame

49. Mimosine is a natural product found in large quantities in the
seeds and foliage of some legume plants and has been shown to
cause inhibition of hair growth and hair loss in mice.

a. What functional groups are present in mimosine?
b. Give the hybridization of the eight carbon atoms in mimosine.
c. How many s and p bonds are found in mimosine?
50. Minoxidil (C9H15N5O) is a compound produced by Pharmacia
Company that has been approved as a treatment of some types
of male pattern baldness.
a

N

S

b

D
O
N
G

O
N
c
d

N

e H

G
O

S

b.

H

c.

d.

O
B
HOO COCH2CHCH3
A
CH3

S

S

N
DQG
H
H

a. Would minoxidil be more soluble in acidic or basic aqueous
solution? Explain.
b. Give the hybridization of the ﬁve nitrogen atoms in minoxidil.
c. Give the hybridization of each of the nine carbon atoms in
minoxidil.
d. Give approximate values of the bond angles marked a, b, c,
d, and e.

1048

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

e. Including all the hydrogen atoms, how many s bonds exist
in minoxidil?
f. How many p bonds exist in minoxidil?
51. For each of the following alcohols, give the systematic name
and specify whether the alcohol is primary, secondary, or
tertiary.
a.
Cl
CH3CHCH2CH2
OH
CH2CH2CH3

b.

CH3CCH2CH3
OH
c.

CH3
OH

52. Draw structural formulas for each of the following alcohols. Indicate whether the alcohol is primary, secondary, or tertiary.
a. 1-butanol
c. 2-methyl-1-butanol
b. 2-butanol
d. 2-methyl-2-butanol
53. Name all the alcohols that have the formula C5H12O. How many
ethers have the formula C5H12O?
54. Name all the aldehydes and ketones that have the formula
C5H10O.
55. Name the following compounds.
a.
Cl
O

59. Which of the following statements is (are) false? Explain why
the statement(s) is (are) false.
O
B
a. CH3CH2CH2COCH3 is a structural isomer of pentanoic acid.
O
CH3
B
A
b. HCCH2CH2CHCH3 is a structural isomer of 2-methyl-3pentanone.
c. CH3CH2OCH2CH2CH3 is a structural isomer of 2-pentanol.
d. CH2 “CHCHCH3 is a structural isomer of 2-butenal.
A
OH
e. Trimethylamine is a structural isomer of CH3CH2CH2NH2.
60. Draw the isomer(s) speciﬁed. There may be more than one possible isomer for each part.
a. a cyclic compound that is an isomer of trans-2-butene
b. an ester that is an isomer of propanoic acid
c. a ketone that is an isomer of butanal
d. a secondary amine that is an isomer of butylamine
e. a tertiary amine that is an isomer of butylamine
f. an ether that is an isomer of 2-methyl-2-propanol
g. a secondary alcohol that is an isomer of 2-methyl-2propanol

Reactions of Organic Compounds

CH3CHCHCCH2

61. Complete the following reactions.

CH3

a. CH3CH “CHCH3  H2 ¡

Cl
b.

58. Draw a structural formula for each of the following.
a. 3-methylpentanoic acid
b. ethyl methanoate
c. methyl benzoate
d. 3-chloro-2,4-dimethylhexanoic acid

O

Pt

b. CH2

CH2CH3

CH3

HCCHCHCH3
CH3
c. CH3

 Cl2

CH3
FeCl3

O
d. CH3C

56. Draw the structural formula for each of the following.
a. formaldehyde (methanal)
b. 4-heptanone
c. 3-chlorobutanal
d. 5,5-dimethyl-2-hexanone
57. Name the following compounds.
a.
O
Cl

C

OH

CH3 O
CH3CH2CHCH

C

CH2CH2CH3
c. HCOOH

CH  2Cl2

c.

CH

b.

CHCHCH

OH

CH2  O2

Spark

CH3
62. Reagents such as HCl, HBr, and HOH (H2O) can add across carbon–carbon double and triple bonds, with H forming a bond to
one of the carbon atoms in the multiple bond and Cl, Br, or OH
forming a bond to the other carbon atom in the multiple bond.
In some cases, two products are possible. For the major organic
product, the addition occurs so that the hydrogen atom in the
reagent attaches to the carbon atom in the multiple bond that already has the greater number of hydrogen atoms bonded to it.
With this rule in mind, draw the structure of the major product
in each of the following reactions.
a. CH3CH2CH “CH2  H2O ¡
b. CH3CH2CH “CH2  HBr ¡
c. CH3CH2C‚CH  2HBr ¡
d.
CH3
 H2 O

1049

Exercises
e. CH3CH2

c.

CH3
C

 HCl

C

CH3CH2CH2OH,

H

CH3

d. CH3CH2NH2,

63. When toluene (C6H5CH3) reacts with chlorine gas in the presence of iron(III) catalyst, the product is a mixture of the ortho
and para isomers of C6H4ClCH3. However, when the reaction is
light-catalyzed with no Fe3 catalyst present, the product is
C6H5CH2Cl. Explain.
64. Why is it preferable to produce chloroethane by the reaction of
HCl(g) with ethene than by the reaction of Cl2(g) with ethane?
(See Exercise 62.)
65. Using appropriate reactants, alcohols can be oxidized into aldehydes, ketones, and/or carboxylic acids. Primary alcohols can be
oxidized into aldehydes, which can then be oxidized into carboxylic acids. Secondary alcohols can be oxidized into ketones,
while tertiary alcohols do not undergo this type of oxidation.
Give the structure of the product(s) resulting from the oxidation
of each of the following alcohols.
a. 3-methyl-1-butanol
b. 3-methyl-2-butanol
c. 2-methyl-2-butanol
OH
d.
CH2
OH

e.

CH3C CH3

CH3OCH3

69. How would you synthesize the following esters?
a. n-octylacetate
O
b.
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2O

CCH2CH3

70. Salicylic acid has the following structure:
CO2 H
OH

Since salicylic acid has both an alcohol functional group and a carboxylic acid functional group, it can undergo two different esteriﬁcation reactions depending on which functional group reacts. For
example, when treated with ethanoic acid (acetic acid), salicylic
acid behaves as an alcohol and the ester produced is acetylsalicylic
acid (aspirin). On the other hand, when reacted with methanol, salicylic acid behaves as an acid and the ester methyl salicylate (oil of
wintergreen) is produced. Methyl salicylate is also an analgesic and
part of the formulation of many liniments for sore muscles. What
are the structures of acetylsalicylic acid and methyl salicylate?

Polymers
CH3

f. HO

O

71. Kel-F is a polymer with the structure

OH
CH3
CH2
OH

66. Oxidation of an aldehyde yields a carboxylic acid:
O
R

CH

O
[ox]

R

C

OH

Draw the structures for the products of the following oxidation
reactions.
3ox4
a. propanal ¡
3ox4
b. 2,3-dimethylpentanal ¡
3ox4
c. 3-ethylbenzaldehyde ¡
67. How would you synthesize each of the following?
a. 1,2-dibromopropane from propene
b. acetone (2-propanone) from an alcohol
c. tert-butyl alcohol (2-methyl-2-propanol) from an alkene (See
Exercise 62.)
d. propanoic acid from an alcohol
68. What tests could you perform to distinguish between the following
pairs of compounds?
a. CH3CH2CH2CH3, CH2PCHCH2CH3
b.
O
CH3CH2CH2COOH,

CH3CH2C CH3

F

F

F

F

F

F

C

C

C

C

C

C

Cl

F

Cl

F

Cl

F

n

What is the monomer for Kel-F?
72. What monomer(s) must be used to produce the following polymers?
a.
CH CH2 CH CH2 CH CH2
F

F

b.
O
c.

CH2

CH2

H
N

d.

F

n

O

CH2

CH2

CH3
C

O

C

O

H

O

N

C

CH3
CH2

C

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

C

CH2

n

e.

CH

CH
CH3

CH

n

O

CH3
CH2

C

CH
CH3
n

C

n

1050

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

f. ¬
1 CClFCF2CClFCF2CClFCF2¬
2n
g.
H

H O

O H

H O

O

OC

COC

COC

COC

C

H

H

H

H

77. Polyimides are polymers that are tough and stable at temperatures of up to 400°C. They are used as a protective coating on
the quartz ﬁbers used in ﬁber optics. What monomers were used
to make the following polyimide?
n

(This polymer is Kodel, used to make ﬁbers of stain-resistant
carpeting.)
Classify these polymers as condensation or addition polymers.
Which are copolymers?

O
B
C

O
B
C

C
B
O

C
B
O

N

N
n

73. “Super glue” contains methyl cyanoacrylate,
78. The Amoco Chemical Company has successfully raced a car with
a plastic engine. Many of the engine parts, including piston skirts,
connecting rods, and valve-train components, were made of a
polymer called Torlon:

NC
O

C

CH2

O

CH3

C

which readily polymerizes upon exposure to traces of water or alcohols on the surfaces to be bonded together. The polymer
provides a strong bond between the two surfaces. Draw the
structure of the polymer formed by methyl cyanoacrylate.
74. Isoprene is the repeating unit in natural rubber. The structure of
isoprene is

C

O
B
C
N
C
B
O

N
H
n

What monomers are used to make this polymer?

CH3
CH2

O
B
C

CH

79. Polystyrene can be made more rigid by copolymerizing styrene
with divinylbenzene:

CH2

a. Give a systematic name for isoprene.
b. When isoprene is polymerized, two polymers of the form
CH3
CH2

C

CH

CH2

n

are possible. In natural rubber, the cis conﬁguration
is found. The polymer with the trans conﬁguration about
the double bond is called gutta percha and was once used
in the manufacture of golf balls. Draw the structure of natural rubber and gutta percha showing three repeating units
and the conﬁguration about the carbon–carbon double
bonds.

How does the divinylbenzene make the copolymer more
rigid?
80. Polyesters containing double bonds are often crosslinked by reacting the polymer with styrene.
a. Draw the structure of the copolymer of

75. Kevlar, used in bulletproof vests, is made by the condensation
copolymerization of the monomers

b. Draw the structure of the crosslinked polymer (after the
polyester has been reacted with styrene).

H2N

NH2

and

HO2C

CO2H

Draw the structure of a portion of the Kevlar chain.
76. The polyester formed from lactic acid,

is used for tissue implants and surgical sutures that will
dissolve in the body. Draw the structure of a portion of this
polymer.

HO¬CH2CH2¬OH and

HO2C¬CH“CH¬CO2H

81. Which of the following polymers would be stronger or more
rigid? Explain your choices.
a. The copolymer of ethylene glycol and terephthalic acid or
the copolymer of 1,2-diaminoethane and terephthalic acid
(1,2-diaminoethane  NH2CH2CH2NH2 )
b. The polymer of HO¬(CH2 ) 6¬CO2H or that of

c. Polyacetylene or polyethylene (The monomer in polyacetylene is ethyne.)

Exercises
82. Poly(lauryl methacrylate) is used as an additive in motor oils to
counter the loss of viscosity at high temperature. The structure is
CH3
A
OCO CH2On
A
C
J G
O
OO(CH2)11OCH3
The long hydrocarbon chain of poly(lauryl methacrylate) makes
the polymer soluble in oil (a mixture of hydrocarbons with
mostly 12 or more carbon atoms). At low temperatures the polymer is coiled into balls. At higher temperatures the balls uncoil
and the polymer exists as long chains. Explain how this helps
control the viscosity of oil.

Natural Polymers
83. Which of the amino acids in Fig. 22.18 contain the following
functional groups in their R group?
a. alcohol
c. amine
b. carboxylic acid
d. amide
84. When pure crystalline amino acids are heated, decomposition generally occurs before the solid melts. Account for this observation.

(Hint: Crystalline amino acids exist as H3NCRHCOO, called
zwitterions.)
85. Aspartame, the artiﬁcial sweetner marketed under the name
Nutra-Sweet, is a methyl ester of a dipeptide:

a. What two amino acids are used to prepare aspartame?
b. There is concern that methanol may be produced by the
decomposition of aspartame. From what portion of the molecule
can methanol be produced? Write an equation for this reaction.
86. Glutathione, a tripeptide found in virtually all cells, functions as
a reducing agent. The structure of glutathione is
O
O
B
B

OOCCHCH2CH2CNHCHCNHCH2COO
A
A
NH3
CH2SH


What amino acids make up glutathione?
87. Draw the structures of the two dipeptides that can be formed
from serine and alanine.
88. Draw the structures of the tripeptides gly–ala–ser and ser–ala–
gly. How many other tripeptides are possible using these three
amino acids?
89. Write the sequence of all possible tetrapeptides composed of the
following amino acids.
a. two phenylalanines and two glycines
b. two phenylalanines, glycine, and alanine
90. How many different pentapeptides can be formed using ﬁve different amino acids?

1051

91. Give an example of amino acids that could give rise to the interactions pictured in Fig. 22.24 that maintain the tertiary structures of proteins.
92. What types of interactions can occur between the side chains of
the following amino acids that would help maintain the tertiary
structure of a protein?
a. cysteine and cysteine
c. glutamic acid and lysine
b. glutamine and serine
d. proline and leucine
93. Oxygen is carried from the lungs to tissues by the protein hemoglobin in red blood cells. Sickle cell anemia is a disease resulting from abnormal hemoglobin molecules in which a valine
is substituted for a single glutamic acid in normal hemoglobin.
How might this substitution affect the structure of hemoglobin?
94. Over 100 different kinds of mutant hemoglobin molecules have
been detected in humans. Unlike sickle cell anemia (see Exercise
93), not all of these mutations are as serious. In one nonlethal
mutation, glutamine substitutes for a single glutamic acid in normal hemoglobin. Rationalize why this substitution is nonlethal.
95. Draw cyclic structures for D-ribose and D-mannose.
96. Indicate the chiral carbon atoms found in the monosaccharides
D-ribose and D-mannose.
97. In addition to using numerical preﬁxes in the general names of
sugars to indicate how many carbon atoms are present, we often
use the preﬁxes keto- and aldo- to indicate whether the sugar is
a ketone or an aldehyde. For example, the monosaccharide fructose is frequently called a ketohexose to emphasize that it contains six carbons as well as the ketone functional group. For each
of the monosaccharides shown in Table 22.8 classify the sugars
as aldohexoses, aldopentoses, ketohexoses, or ketopentoses.
98. Glucose can occur in three forms: two cyclic forms and one
open-chain structure. In aqueous solution, only a tiny fraction
of the glucose is in the open-chain form. Yet tests for the presence of glucose depend on reaction with the aldehyde group,
which is found only in the open-chain form. Explain why these
tests work.
99. What are the structural differences between a- and b-glucose?
These two cyclic forms of glucose are the building blocks to
form two different polymers. Explain.
100. Cows can digest cellulose, but humans can’t. Why not?
101. Which of the amino acids in Fig. 22.18 contain more than one
chiral carbon atom? Draw the structures of these amino acids
and indicate all chiral carbon atoms.
102. Why is glycine not optically active?
103. Which of the noncyclic isomers of bromochloropropene are optically active?
104. How many chiral carbon atoms does the following structure have?
CH3CHOH

OH

OH
O

1052

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

105. Part of a certain DNA sequence is G–G–T–C–T–A–T–A–C.
What is the complementary sequence?
106. The codons (words) in DNA (that specify which amino acid
should be at a particular point in a protein) are three bases long.
How many such three-letter words can be made from the four
bases adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine?
107. Which base will hydrogen-bond with uracil within an RNA molecule? Draw the structure of this base pair.
108. Tautomers are molecules that differ in the position of a hydrogen atom. A tautomeric form of thymine has the structure

hv

b. 1,3-dimethylcyclobutane  Cl2 ¡
hv
c. 2,3-dimethylbutane  Cl2 ¡
113. Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs) are highly toxic
substances that are present in trace amounts as by-products of
some chemical manufacturing processes. They have been implicated in a number of environmental incidents—for example, the
chemical contamination at Love Canal and the herbicide spraying in Vietnam. The structure of dibenzo-p-dioxin, along with
the customary numbering convention, is
1
2
3
4

If the tautomer above, rather than the stable form of thymine
were present in a strand of DNA during replication, what would
be the result?

6

7

c. CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
d.
O

CH3CH2CH2CH
e.

CH3
CH3CCH3
CH3

115.

116.
117.

118.

Additional Exercises
111. Draw the following incorrectly named compounds and name
them correctly.
a. 2-ethyl-3-methyl-5-isopropylhexane
b. 2-ethyl-4-tert-butylpentane
c. 3-methyl-4-isopropylpentane
d. 2-ethyl-3-butyne
112. In the presence of light, chlorine can substitute for one (or more)
of the hydrogens in an alkane. For the following reactions, draw
the possible monochlorination products.
hv
a. 2,2-dimethylpropane  Cl2 ¡

O

8

CH3CH2CH2CH2

GAA, GAG
GUU, GUC, GUA, GUG
AUG
UGG
UUU, UUC
GAU, GAC

These sequences are complementary to the sequences in DNA.
a. Give the corresponding sequences in DNA for the amino acids
listed above.
b. Give a DNA sequence that would code for the peptide
trp–glu–phe–met.
c. How many different DNA sequences can code for the
butapeptide in part b?
d. What is the peptide that is produced from the DNA sequence
T–A–C–C–T–G–A–A–G?
e. What other DNA sequences would yield the same tripeptide
as in part d?
110. The change of a single base in the DNA sequence for normal hemoglobin can encode for the abnormal hemoglobin giving rise to
sickle cell anemia. Which base in the codon for glu in DNA is
replaced to give the codon(s) for val? (See Exercises 93 and 109.)

9

The most toxic PCCD is 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin.
Draw the structure of this compound. Also draw the structures
of two other isomers containing four chlorine atoms.
114. Consider the following ﬁve compounds.
a. CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3
b.
OH

109. The base sequences in mRNA that code for certain amino acids are
Glu:
Val:
Met:
Trp:
Phe:
Asp:

O

119.

120.

The boiling points of these ﬁve compounds are 9.5°C, 36°C,
69°C, 76°C, and 117°C. Which compound boils at 36°C? Explain.
The two isomers having the formula C2H6O boil at 23°C and
78.5°C. Draw the structure of the isomer that boils at 23°C
and of the isomer that boils at 78.5°C.
Ignoring ring compounds, which isomer of C2H4O2 should boil
at the lowest temperature?
Explain why methyl alcohol is soluble in water in all proportions, while stearyl alcohol [CH3(CH2)16OH] is a waxy solid that
is not soluble in water.
Is octanoic acid more soluble in 1 M HCl, 1 M NaOH, or
pure water? Explain. Drugs such as morphine (C17H19NO3)
are often treated with strong acids. The most commonly used
form of morphine is morphine hydrochloride (C17H20ClNO3).
Why is morphine treated in this way? (Hint: Morphine is
an amine.)
Consider the compounds butanoic acid, pentanal, n-hexane, and
1-pentanol. The boiling points of these compounds (in no speciﬁc order) are 69°C, 103°C, 137°C, and 164°C. Match the boiling points to the correct compound.
Consider the reaction to produce the ester methyl acetate:
O
CH3OH  CH3COH

O
CH3COCH3  H2O
Methyl
acetate

Additional Exercises

121.

122.

123.

124.

When this reaction is carried out with CH3OH containing radioactive oxygen-18, the water produced does not contain oxygen-18.
Explain the results of this radioisotope tracer experiment.
A compound containing only carbon and hydrogen is 85.63% C
by mass. Reaction of this compound with H2O produces a secondary alcohol as the major product and a primary alcohol as
the minor product (see Exercise 62). If the molar mass of the
hydrocarbon is between 50 and 60 g/mol, name the compound.
Diborane, B2H6, is a highly unstable compound that reacts explosively with oxygen. Ethane, C2H6, combines with oxygen only
at elevated temperatures. Explain the differences in these two
compounds.
Three different organic compounds have the formula C3H8O.
Only two of these isomers react with KMnO4 (a strong oxidizing agent). What are the names of the products when these isomers react with excess KMnO4?
Consider the following polymer:
O

O

C

C

O CH2 CH2 O

1053

129. Ethylene oxide,
CH2 CH2
O
is an important industrial chemical. Although most ethers are unreactive, ethylene oxide is quite reactive. It resembles C2H4 in
its reactions in that addition reactions occur across the C¬O
bond in ethylene oxide.
a. Why is ethylene oxide so reactive? (Hint: Consider the bond
angles in ethylene oxide as compared with those predicted by
the VSEPR model.)
b. Ethylene oxide undergoes addition polymerization, forming
a polymer used in many applications requiring a nonionic surfactant. Draw the structure of this polymer.
130. Another way of producing highly crosslinked polyesters is
to use glycerol. Alkyd resins are a polymer of this type.
The polymer forms very tough coatings when baked onto a
surface and is used in paints for automobiles and large
appliances. Draw the structure of the polymer formed from the
condensation of

n

Is this polymer a homopolymer or a copolymer, and is it formed
by addition polymerization or condensation polymerization?
What is (are) the monomer(s) for this polymer?
125. Nylon is named according to the number of C atoms between
the N atoms in the chain. Nylon-46 has 4 C atoms then 6 C
atoms, and this pattern repeats. Nylon-6 always has 6 atoms in
a row. Speculate as to why nylon-46 is stronger than nylon-6.
(Hint: Consider the strengths of interchain forces.)
126. The polymer nitrile is a copolymer made from acrylonitrile and
butadiene; it is used to make automotive hoses and gaskets. Draw
the structure of nitrile. (Hint: See Table 22.7.)
127. Polyaramid is a term applied to polyamides containing aromatic
groups. These polymers were originally made for use as tire cords
but have since found many other uses.
a. Kevlar is used in bulletproof vests and many high-strength

ON
A
H

O
B
NC
A
H

O
B
NC
A
H

O
B
CN
A
H

O
B
CO
n

composites. The structure of Kevlar is
Which monomers are used to make Kevlar?
b. Nomex is a polyaramid used in ﬁre-resistant clothing. It is a
copolymer of
H2 N

HO2C

NH2

CO 2H

and

Draw the structure of the Nomex polymer. How do Kevlar
and Nomex differ in their structures?
128. When acrylic polymers are burned, toxic fumes are produced. For
example, in many airplane ﬁres, more passenger deaths have been
caused by breathing toxic fumes than by the ﬁre itself. Using polyacrylonitrile as an example, what would you expect to be one of the
most toxic, gaseous combustion products created in the reaction?

CO2H
CH2
OH

CH

CH2 and

OH OH
Glyercol

CO2H
Phthalic acid

Explain how crosslinking occurs in this polymer.
131. Monosodium glutamate (MSG) is commonly used as a ﬂavoring
in foods. Draw the structure of MSG.
132. a. Use bond energies (Table 8.4) to estimate ¢H for the reaction of two molecules of glycine to form a peptide linkage.
b. Would you predict ¢S to favor the formation of peptide linkages between two molecules of glycine?
c. Would you predict the formation of proteins to be a spontaneous process?
133. The reaction to form a phosphate ester linkage between two nucleotides can be approximated as follows:
O
A
Sugar OOO P OOH  H OO CH2O sugar
A
O
O
A
OOO P OOO CH2O  H2O
A
O
Would you predict the formation of a dinucleotide from two nucleotides to be a spontaneous process?
134. Considering your answers to Exercises 132 and 133, how can
you justify the existence of proteins and nucleic acids in light of
the second law of thermodynamics?
135. All amino acids have at least two functional groups with acidic
or basic properties. In alanine, the carboxylic acid group has
Ka  4.5  10 3 and the amino group has Kb  7.4  10 5.
Three ions of alanine are possible when alanine is dissolved in

1054

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

water. Which of these ions would predominate in a solution with
[H  ]  1.0 M? In a solution with [OH ]  1.0 M?
136. The average molar mass of one base pair of nucleotides
in DNA is approximately 600 g/mol. The spacing between
successive base pairs is about 0.34 nm, and a complete turn in
the helical structure of DNA occurs about every 3.4 nm. If a
DNA molecule has a molar mass of 4.5  109 g/mol, approximately how many complete turns exist in the DNA ␣-helix
structure?
137. When heat is added to proteins, the hydrogen bonding in the secondary structure is disrupted. What are the algebraic signs of ¢H
and ¢S for the denaturation process?
138. In glycine, the carboxylic acid group has Ka  4.3  10 3 and
the amino group has Kb  6.0  10 5. Use these equilibrium
constant values to calculate the equilibrium constants for the following.
a. H3NCH2CO2  H2O ∆ H2NCH2CO2  H3O
b. H2NCH2CO2  H2O ∆ H2NCH2CO2H  OH
c. H3NCH2CO2H ∆ 2H  H2NCH2CO2

141. The structure of tartaric acid is

a. Is the form of tartaric acid pictured below optically active?
Explain.

142.

Challenge Problems

143.

139. The isoelectric point of an amino acid is the pH at which the
molecule has no net charge. For glycine, that point would be the
pH at which virtually all glycine molecules are in the form

H3NCH2CO2 . This form of glycine is amphoteric since it can
act as both an acid and a base. If we assume that the principal
equilibrium at the isoelectric point has the best acid reacting with
the best base present, then the reaction is

144.

2H3NCH2CO2 ∆ H2NCH2CO2  H3NCH2CO2H

(i)

145.

Assuming this reaction is the principal equilibrium, then the following relationship must hold true:
3 H2NCH2CO2  4  3 H3NCH2CO2H 4

(ii)

Use this result and your answer to part c of Exercise 138 to
calculate the pH at which equation (ii) is true. It will be the
isoelectric point of glycine.
140. In 1994 chemists at Texas A & M University reported the synthesis of a non-naturally occurring amino acid (C & E News,
April 18, 1994, pp. 26–27):
CH2 H
H 2N
G D G D
C
C
G
D
CH2SCH3
CO2H
a. To which naturally occurring amino acid is this compound
most similar?
b. A tetrapeptide, phe–met–arg–phe—NH2, is synthesized in the
brains of rats addicted to morphine and heroin. (The
O
ƒƒ
¬NH2 indicates that the peptide ends in ¬C ¬NH2 instead
of ¬CO2H.) The TAMU scientists synthesized a similar
tetrapeptide, with the synthetic amino acid above replacing
one of the original amino acids. Draw a structure for the
tetrapeptide containing the synthetic amino acid.
c. Indicate the chiral carbon atoms in the synthetic amino acid.

146.

Note: The dashed lines show groups behind the plane of the
page. The wedges show groups in front of the plane.
b. Draw the optically active forms of tartaric acid.
Using one of the Lewis structures for benzene (C6H6), estimate
H f for C6H6(g) using bond energies and given the standard enthalpy of formation of C(g) is 717 kJ/mol. The experimental H f
value for C6H6(g) is 83 kJ/mol. Explain the discrepancy between
the experimental value and the calculated H f value for C6H6(g).
Mycomycin, a naturally occurring antibiotic produced by the
fungus Nocardia acidophilus, has the molecular formula
C13H10O2 and the systematic name 3,5,7,8-tridecatetraene-10,12diynoic acid. Draw the structure of mycomycin.
Sorbic acid is used to prevent mold and fungus growth in some
food products, especially cheeses. The systematic name for sorbic acid is 2,4-hexadienoic acid. Draw structures for the four
geometrical isomers of sorbic acid.
Consider the following reactions. For parts b–d, see Exercise 62.
a. When C5H12 is reacted with Cl2 (g) in the presence of ultraviolet light, four different monochlorination products form.
What is the structure of C5H12 in this reaction?
b. When C4H8 is reacted with H2O, a tertiary alcohol is produced as the major product. What is the structure of C4H8 in
this reaction?
c. When C7H12 is reacted with HCl, 1-chloro-1-methylcyclohexane is produced as the major product. What are the two
possible structures for C7H12 in this reaction?
d. When a hydrocarbon is reacted with H2O and the major product of this reaction is then oxidized, acetone (2-propanone)
is produced. What is the structure of the hydrocarbon in this
reaction?
e. When C5H12O is oxidized, a carboxylic acid is produced.
What are the possible structures for C5H12O in this
reaction?
Polycarbonates are a class of thermoplastic polymers that are
used in the plastic lenses of eyeglasses and in the shells of bicycle helmets. A polycarbonate is made from the reaction of
bisphenol A (BPA) with phosgene (COCl2 ) :
CH3
n

HOO

A

OCO
A

OOH

CH3
BPA

Catalyst
¡ polycarbonate  2nHCl
¬¬¬¡

 nCOCl2

Integrative Problems
Phenol (C6H5OH) is used to terminate the polymer (stop its
growth).
a. Draw the structure of the polycarbonate chain formed from
the above reaction.
b. Is this reaction a condensation or addition polymerization?
147. A urethane linkage occurs when an alcohol adds across the
carbon–nitrogen double bond in an isocyanate:

ROOOH  OPCPNOR
Alcohol

Isocyanate

O
B
ROOCONOR
A
H
A urethane

Polyurethanes (formed from the copolymerization of a diol with
a diisocyanate) are used in foamed insulation and a variety of
other construction materials. What is the structure of the
polyurethane formed by the following reaction?

1055

151. A chemical “breathalyzer” test works because ethyl alcohol in the
breath is oxidized by the dichromate ion (orange) to form acetic
acid and chromium(III) ion (green). The balanced reaction is
3C2H5OH1aq2  2Cr2O72 1aq2  2H  1aq2 ¡
3HC2H3O2 1aq2  4Cr3 1aq2  11H2O1l2
You analyze a breathalyzer test in which 4.2 mg of K2Cr2O7 was
reduced. Assuming the volume of the breath was 0.500 L at 30.°C
and 750. mm Hg, what was the mole percent alcohol of the breath?
152. Consider a sample of a hydrocarbon at 0.959 atm and 298 K.
Upon combusting the entire sample in oxygen, you collect a mixture of gaseous carbon dioxide and water vapor at 1.51 atm and
375 K. This mixture has a density of 1.391 g/L and occupies a
volume four times as large as that of the pure hydrocarbon.
Determine the molecular formula of the hydrocarbon and name it.
153. Estradiol is a female hormone with the following structure:
CH3 OH

HO
148. ABS plastic is a tough, hard plastic used in applications requiring shock resistance. The polymer consists of three monomer
units: acrylonitrile (C3H3N), butadiene (C4H6), and styrene
(C8H8).
a. Draw two repeating units of ABS plastic assuming that the
three monomer units react in a 1:1:1 mole ratio and react in
the same order as the monomers listed above.
b. A sample of ABS plastic contains 8.80% N by mass. It took
0.605 g of Br2 to react completely with a 1.20-g sample of
ABS plastic. What is the percent by mass of acrylonitrile,
butadiene, and styrene in this polymer sample?
c. ABS plastic does not react in a 1:1:1 mole ratio among the
three monomer units. Using the results from part b, determine
the relative numbers of the monomer units in this sample of
ABS plastic.
149. Stretch a rubber band while holding it gently to your lips. Then
slowly let it relax while still in contact with your lips.
a. What happens to the temperature of the rubber band on
stretching?
b. Is the stretching an exothermic or endothermic process?
c. Explain the above result in terms of intermolecular forces.
d. What is the sign of ¢S and ¢G for stretching the rubber band?
e. Give the molecular explanation for the sign of ¢S for
stretching.
150. Alcohols are very useful starting materials for the production of
many different compounds. The following conversions, starting
with 1-butanol, can be carried out in two or more steps. Show
the steps (reactants/catalysts) you would follow to carry out the
conversions, drawing the formula for the organic product in each
step. For each step, a major product must be produced.
See Exercise 62. Hint: in the presence of H, an alcohol is converted into an alkene and water. This is the exact reverse of the
reaction of adding water to an alkene to form an alcohol.
a. 1-butanol ¡ butane
b. 1-butanol ¡ 2-butanone

How many chiral carbon atoms are in estradiol?

Integrative Problems
These problems require the integration of multiple concepts to ﬁnd the
solutions.

154. Helicenes are extended fused polyaromatic hydrocarbons that
have a helical or screw-shaped structure.
a. A 0.1450-g sample of solid helicene is combusted in air to give
0.5063 g of CO2. What is the empirical formula of this helicene?
b. If a 0.0938-g sample of this helicene is dissolved in 12.5 g
of solvent to give a 0.0175 m solution, what is the molecular
formula of this helicene?
c. What is the balanced reaction for the combustion of this
helicene?
155. An organometallic compound is one containing at least one
metal–carbon bond. An example of an organometallic species is
(CH3CH2)MBr, which contains a metal–ethyl bond.
a. If M2 has the electron conﬁguration [Ar]3d10, what is the
percent by mass of M in (CH3CH2)MBr?
b. One of the reactions in which (CH3CH2)MBr becomes involved
is the conversion of a ketone to an alcohol as illustrated here:
O
*

OH
*

How does the hybridization of the starred carbon atom
change, if at all, in going from reactants to products?
c. What is the systematic name of the product?
Hint: In this shorthand notation, all the C¬H bonds have
been eliminated and the lines represent C¬C bonds, unless
shown differently. As is typical of most organic compounds,
each carbon atom has four bonds to it and the oxygen atoms
have only two bonds.

1056

Chapter Twenty-Two Organic and Biological Molecules

Marathon Problems
These problems are designed to incorporate several concepts and techniques
into one situation. Marathon Problems can be used in class by groups of
students to help facilitate problem-solving skills.

156. For each of the following, ﬁll in the blank with the correct
response. All of these ﬁll-in-the-blank problems pertain to material covered in the sections on alkanes, alkenes and alkynes,
aromatic hydrocarbons, and hydrocarbon derivatives.
a. The ﬁrst “organic” compound to be synthesized in the laboratory, rather than being isolated from nature, was
,
which was prepared from
.
b. An organic compound whose carbon–carbon bonds are all
single bonds is said to be
.
c. The general orientation of the four pairs of electrons around
the carbon atoms in alkanes is
.
d. Alkanes in which the carbon atoms form a single unbranched
chain are said to be
alkanes.
e. Structural isomerism occurs when two molecules have the
same number of each type of atom but exhibit different
arrangements of the
between those atoms.
f. The systematic names of all saturated hydrocarbons have the
ending
added to a root name that indicates the
number of carbon atoms in the molecule.
g. For a branched hydrocarbon, the root name for the hydrocarbon comes from the number of carbon atoms in the
continuous chain in the molecule.
h. The positions of substituents along the hydrocarbon framework of a molecule are indicated by the
of the
carbon atom to which the substituents are attached.
i. The major use of alkanes has been in
reactions,
as a source of heat and light.
j. With very reactive agents, such as, the halogen elements,
alkanes undergo
reactions, whereby a new atom
replaces one or more hydrogen atoms of the alkane.
k. Alkenes and alkynes are characterized by their ability to undergo rapid, complete
reactions, by which other
atoms attach themselves to the carbon atoms of the double
or triple bond.
l. Unsaturated fats may be converted to saturated fats by the
process of
.
m. Benzene is the parent member of the group of hydrocarbons
called
hydrocarbons.
n. An atom or group of atoms that imparts new and characteristic
properties to an organic molecule is called a
group.
o. A
alcohol is one in which there is only one hydrocarbon group attached to the carbon atom holding the
hydroxyl group.
p. The simplest alcohol, methanol, is prepared industrially by
the hydrogenation of
.
q. Ethanol is commonly prepared by the
of certain
sugars by yeast.
r. Both aldehydes and ketones contain the
group,
but they differ in where this group occurs along the hydrocarbon chain.
s. Aldehydes and ketones can be prepared by
of the
corresponding alcohol.
t. Organic acids, which contain the
group, are typically weak acids.

u. The typically sweet-smelling compounds called
result from the condensation reaction of an organic acid with
an
.
157. Choose one of the following terms to match the description given
in statements (1)–(17). All of the following pertain to proteins
or carbohydrates.
a. aldohexose
g. disaccharides
m. ketohexoses
b. saliva
h. disulﬁde
n. oxytocin
c. cellulose
i. globular
o. pleated sheet
d. CH2O
j. glycogen
p. polypeptide
e. cysteine
k. glycoside linkage q. primary structure
f. denaturation l. hydrophobic
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)

polymer consisting of many amino acids
linkage that forms between two cysteine species
peptide hormone that triggers milk secretion
proteins with roughly spherical shape
sequence of amino acids in a protein
silk protein secondary structure
water-repelling amino acid side chain
amino acid responsible for permanent wave in hair
breakdown of a protein’s tertiary and/or secondary structure
animal polymer of glucose
¬C¬O¬C¬ bond between rings in disaccharide sugars
empirical formula leading to the name carbohydrate
where enzymes catalyzing the breakdown of glycoside linkages are found
(14) six-carbon ketone sugars
(15) structural component of plants, polymer of glucose
(16) sugars consisting of two monomer units
(17) six-carbon aldehyde sugars
158. For each of the following, ﬁll in the blank with the correct response(s). All of the following pertain to nucleic acids.
a. The substance in the nucleus of the cell that stores and transmits
genetic information is DNA, which stands for
.
b. The basic repeating monomer units of DNA and RNA are
called
.
c. The pentose deoxyribose is found in DNA, whereas
is found in RNA.
d. The basic linkage in DNA or RNA between the sugar molecule and phosphoric acid is a phosphate
linkage.
e. The bases on opposite strands of DNA are said to be
to each other, which means the bases ﬁt together
speciﬁcally by hydrogen bonding to one another.
f. In a strand of normal DNA, the base
is always
found paired with the base adenine, whereas
is
always found paired with cytosine.
g. A given segment of the DNA molecule, which contains the
molecular coding for a speciﬁc protein to be synthesized, is
referred to as a
.
h. During protein synthesis,
RNA molecules attach
to and transport speciﬁc amino acids to the appropriate position on the pattern provided by
RNA molecules.
i. The codes speciﬁed by
are responsible for assembling the correct primary structure of proteins.
Get help understanding core concepts and visualizing
molecular-level interactions, and practice problem solving,
by visiting the Online Study Center at college.hmco.com/
PIC/zumdahl7e.

Appendixes
Mathematical Procedures
A1.1 Exponential Notation
The numbers characteristic of scientiﬁc measurements are often very large or very small;
thus it is convenient to express them using powers of 10. For example, the number
1,300,000 can be expressed as 1.3  106, which means multiply 1.3 by 10 six times,
or
1.3  106  1.3  10  10  10  10  10  10

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Appendix One

106  1 million

Note that each multiplication by 10 moves the decimal point one place to the right:
1.3  10  13.
13  10  130.
130  10  1300.
o
Thus the easiest way to interpret the notation 1.3  106 is that it means move the decimal point in 1.3 to the right six times:
1.3  106  1 3 0 0 0 0 0  1,300,000
123456

Using this notation, the number 1985 can be expressed as 1.985  103. Note that the
usual convention is to write the number that appears before the power of 10 as a number
between 1 and 10. To end up with the number 1.985, which is between 1 and 10, we had
to move the decimal point three places to the left. To compensate for that, we must multiply by 103, which says that to get the intended number we start with 1.985 and move
the decimal point three places to the right; that is:
1.985  103  1 9 8 5.
12 3

Some other examples are given below.
Number
5.6
39
943
1126

Exponential Notation
5.6
3.9
9.43
1.126






100 or 5.6  1
101
102
103

So far we have considered numbers greater than 1. How do we represent a number
such as 0.0034 in exponential notation? We start with a number between 1 and 10 and
divide by the appropriate power of 10:
0.0034 

3.4
3.4
 3  3.4  103
10  10  10
10

A1

Appendixes
Division by 10 moves the decimal point one place to the left. Thus the number
0. 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 4
7 6 5 4 3 2 1

can be written as 1.4  107.
To summarize, we can write any number in the form
N  10  n
where N is between 1 and 10 and the exponent n is an integer. If the sign preceding n is
positive, it means the decimal point in N should be moved n places to the right. If a negative sign precedes n, the decimal point in N should be moved n places to the left.

Multiplication and Division
When two numbers expressed in exponential notation are multiplied, the initial numbers
are multiplied and the exponents of 10 are added:
1M  10m 21N  10n 2  1MN2  10m n
For example (to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures, as required),
13.2  104 212.8  103 2  9.0  107
When the numbers are multiplied, if a result greater than 10 is obtained for the initial number, the decimal point is moved one place to the left and the exponent of 10 is increased
by 1:
15.8  102 214.3  108 2  24.9  1010
 2.49  1011
 2.5  1011

(two signiﬁcant ﬁgures)

Division of two numbers expressed in exponential notation involves normal division
of the initial numbers and subtraction of the exponent of the divisor from that of the dividend. For example,
4.8  108
4.8

 101832  2.3  105
2.1
2.1  103

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

A2

Divisor

If the initial number resulting from the division is less than 1, the decimal point is moved
one place to the right and the exponent of 10 is decreased by 1. For example,
6.4  103
6.4

 101352  0.77  102
8.3
8.3  105
 7.7  103

Addition and Subtraction
To add or subtract numbers expressed in exponential notation, the exponents of the numbers must be the same. For example, to add 1.31  105 and 4.2  104, we must rewrite
one number so that the exponents of both are the same. The number 1.31  105 can be
written 13.1  104, since moving the decimal point one place to the right can be compensated for by decreasing the exponent by 1. Now we can add the numbers:
13.1  104
 4.2  104
17.3  104

Appendixes

A3

In correct exponential notation the result is expressed as 1.73  105.
To perform addition or subtraction with numbers expressed in exponential notation, only
the initial numbers are added or subtracted. The exponent of the result is the same as those
of the numbers being added or subtracted. To subtract 1.8  102 from 8.99  103, we write
8.99  103
0.18  103
8.81  103

Powers and Roots
When a number expressed in exponential notation is taken to some power, the initial number is taken to the appropriate power and the exponent of 10 is multiplied by that power:
1N  10n 2 m  N m  10mn
For example,*

17.5  1022 3  7.53  1032
 422  106
 4.22  108
 4.2  108

(two signiﬁcant ﬁgures)

When a root is taken of a number expressed in exponential notation, the root of the
initial number is taken and the exponent of 10 is divided by the number representing the
root:
1N  10n  1n  10n 2 1 2  1N  10n 2
For example,

12.9  106 2 1 2  12.9  106 2
 1.7  103

Because the exponent of the result must be an integer, we may sometimes have to change the
form of the number so that the power divided by the root equals an integer. For example,
21.9  103  11.9  103 2 1 2 




10.19  104 2 1 2
10.19  102
0.44  102
4.4  101

In this case, we moved the decimal point one place to the left and increased the exponent
from 3 to 4 to make n2 an integer.
The same procedure is followed for roots other than square roots. For example,
3
2
6.9  105  16.9  105 2 1 3 




and

10.69  106 2 1 3
3
1
0.69  102
0.88  102
8.8  101

3
2
4.6  1010  14.6  1010 2 1 3  146  109 2 1 3
3
 1
46  103
 3.6  103

*Refer to the instruction booklet for your calculator for directions concerning how to take roots
and powers of numbers.

A4

Appendixes

A1.2 Logarithms
A logarithm is an exponent. Any number N can be expressed as follows:
N  10 x
For example,
1000  103
100  102
10  101
1  100
The common, or base 10, logarithm of a number is the power to which 10 must be taken
to yield the number. Thus, since 1000  103,
log 1000  3
Similarly,

log 100  2
log 10  1
log 1  0

For a number between 10 and 100, the required exponent of 10 will be between 1 and 2. For
example, 65  101.8129; that is, log 65  1.8129. For a number between 100 and 1000, the
exponent of 10 will be between 2 and 3. For example, 650  102.8129 and log 650  2.8129.
A number N greater than 0 and less than 1 can be expressed as follows:
N  10x 

1
10 x

For example,
1
1
 3  103
1000
10
1
1
0.01 
 2  102
100
10
1
1
0.1 
 1  101
10
10

0.001 

Thus
log 0.001  3
log 0.01  2
log 0.1  1
Although common logs are often tabulated, the most convenient method for obtaining such logs is to use an electronic calculator. On most calculators the number is ﬁrst
entered and then the log key is punched. The log of the number then appears in the display.*
Some examples are given below. You should reproduce these results on your calculator to
be sure that you can ﬁnd common logs correctly.
Number

Common Log

36
1849
0.156
1.68  105

1.56
3.2669
0.807
4.775

*Refer to the instruction booklet for your calculator for the exact sequence to obtain logarithms.

Appendixes

A5

Note that the number of digits after the decimal point in a common log is equal to the
number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the original number.
Since logs are simply exponents, they are manipulated according to the rules for exponents. For example, if A  10 x and B  10 y, then their product is
A  B  10 x  10 y  10 xy
and
log AB  x  y  log A  log B
For division, we have
A 10 x

 10 xy
B 10 y
and
log

A
 x  y  log A  log B
B

For a number raised to a power, we have
An  110 x 2 n  10nx
and
log An  nx  n log A
It follows that
log

1
 log An  n log A
An

or, for n  1,
log

1
 log A
A

When a common log is given, to ﬁnd the number it represents, we must carry out the
process of exponentiation. For example, if the log is 2.673, then N  102.673. The process
of exponentiation is also called taking the antilog, or the inverse logarithm. This operation
is usually carried out on calculators in one of two ways. The majority of calculators require
that the log be entered ﬁrst and then the keys INV and LOG pressed in succession. For example, to ﬁnd N  102.673 we enter 2.673 and then press INV and LOG . The number 471
will be displayed; that is, N  471. Some calculators have a 10x key. In that case, the log
is entered ﬁrst and then the 10x key is pressed. Again, the number 471 will be displayed.
Natural logarithms, another type of logarithm, are based on the number 2.7183, which is
referred to as e. In this case, a number is represented as N  e x  2.7183x. For example,
N  7.15  ex
ln 7.15  x  1.967
To ﬁnd the natural log of a number using a calculator, the number is entered and then the
ln key is pressed. Use the following examples to check your technique for ﬁnding natural logs with your calculator:

Number (e x )

Natural Log(x)

784
1.61  103
1.00  107
1.00

6.664
7.384
16.118
0

A6

Appendixes
If a natural logarithm is given, to ﬁnd the number it represents, exponentiation to the
base e (2.7183) must be carried out. With many calculators this is done using a key marked
ex (the natural log is entered, with the correct sign, and then the ex key is pressed).
The other common method for exponentiation to base e is to enter the natural log and
then press the INV and ln keys in succession. The following examples will help you
check your technique:
ln N(x)

N(e x)

3.256
5.169
13.112

25.9
5.69  103
4.95  105

Since natural logarithms are simply exponents, they are also manipulated according to
the mathematical rules for exponents given earlier for common logs.

A1.3 Graphing Functions
In interpreting the results of a scientiﬁc experiment, it is often useful to make a graph. If
possible, the function to be graphed should be in a form that gives a straight line. The
equation for a straight line (a linear equation) can be represented by the general form
y  mx  b
where y is the dependent variable, x is the independent variable, m is the slope, and b is
the intercept with the y axis.
To illustrate the characteristics of a linear equation, the function y  3x  4 is plotted
in Fig. A.1. For this equation m  3 and b  4. Note that the y intercept occurs when x 
0. In this case the intercept is 4, as can be seen from the equation (b  4).
The slope of a straight line is deﬁned as the ratio of the rate of change in y to that in x:
m  slope 

¢y
¢x

For the equation y  3x  4, y changes three times as fast as x (since x has a coefﬁcient
of 3). Thus the slope in this case is 3. This can be veriﬁed from the graph. For the triangle shown in Fig. A.1,
¢y  34  10  24 and
y
y3x4

60
50
40
30

y

20
10

x

0

10

Intercept
FIGURE A.1
Graph of the linear equation y  3x  4.

20

30

40

x

¢x  10  2  8

Appendixes

3A4  kt  3 A4 0
ln 3 A4  kt  ln 3A4 0
1
1
 kt 
3A 4
3A4 0
¢Hvap 1
ln Pvap  
a bC
R
T

Slope
(m)

3A4 vs. t
ln3A4 vs. t
1
vs. t
3A4
ln Pvap vs.

Intercept
(b)
3A4 0
ln 3A4 0
1
3A4 0

k
k
k
¢Hvap

1
T

R

C

Section
in Text
12.4
12.4
12.4
10.8

Thus
¢y
24

3
¢x
8

Slope 

The preceding example illustrates a general method for obtaining the slope of a line
from the graph of that line. Simply draw a triangle with one side parallel to the y axis
and the other parallel to the x axis as shown in Fig. A.1. Then determine the lengths of
the sides to give y and x, respectively, and compute the ratio y x.
Sometimes an equation that is not in standard form can be changed to the form
y  mx  b by rearrangement or mathematical manipulation. An example is the equation
k  AeEaRT described in Section 12.7, where A, Ea, and R are constants; k is the dependent
variable; and 1T is the independent variable. This equation can be changed to standard
form by taking the natural logarithm of both sides,
ln k  ln AeEa

RT

 ln A  ln eEa

RT

 ln A 

Ea
RT

noting that the log of a product is equal to the sum of the logs of the individual terms and
that the natural log of eEaRT is simply the exponent EaRT. Thus, in standard form, the
equation k  AeEaRT is written

h
y

Ea 1
a b  ln A
R T

{

ln k  

{

FIGURE A.2
Graph of ln k versus 1/T.

What Is
Plotted
( y vs. x)

Equation
( y  mx  b)

E
Slope = − a
R

1
T

Some Useful Linear Equations in Standard Form

{

ln k

TABLE A.1

⎧
⎨
⎩

Intercept = ln A

A7

h
m

h
x

h
b

A plot of ln k versus 1T (see Fig. A.2) gives a straight line with slope EaR and intercept ln A.
Other linear equations that are useful in the study of chemistry are listed in standard
form in Table A.1.

A1.4 Solving Quadratic Equations
A quadratic equation, a polynomial in which the highest power of x is 2, can be written
as
ax2  bx  c  0
One method for ﬁnding the two values of x that satisfy a quadratic equation is to use the
quadratic formula:
x

b  2b2  4ac
2a

A8

Appendixes
where a, b, and c are the coefﬁcients of x2 and x and the constant, respectively. For example,
in determining [H] in a solution of 1.0  104 M acetic acid the following expression
arises:
1.8  105 
which yields

x2
1.0  104  x

x2  11.8  105 2x  1.8  109  0

where a  1, b  1.8  105, and c  1.8  109. Using the quadratic formula, we
have
x


b  2b2  4ac
2a

1.8  105  23.24  1010  14211211.8  109 2
2112

1.8  105  23.24  1010  7.2  109
2
1.8  105  27.5  109

2
1.8  105  8.7  105

2



Thus
x

6.9  105
 3.5  105
2

and
x

10.5  105
 5.2  105
2

Note that there are two roots, as there always will be, for a polynomial in x2. In this case
x represents a concentration of H (see Section 14.3). Thus the positive root is the one
that solves the problem, since a concentration cannot be a negative number.
A second method for solving quadratic equations is by successive approximations, a
systematic method of trial and error. A value of x is guessed and substituted into the equation everywhere x (or x2) appears, except for one place. For example, for the equation
x2  11.8  105 2x  1.8  109  0

we might guess x  2  105. Substituting that value into the equation gives
x2  11.8  105 212  105 2  1.8  109  0

or
x2  1.8  109  3.6  1010  1.4  109
Thus
x  3.7  105
Note that the guessed value of x(2  105) is not the same as the value of x that is calculated (3.7  105) after inserting the estimated value. This means that x  2  105
is not the correct solution, and we must try another guess. We take the calculated value
(3.7  105) as our next guess:
x2  11.8  105 213.7  105 2  1.8  109  0
x2  1.8  109  6.7  1010  1.1  109

Appendixes

A9

Thus
x  3.3  105
Now we compare the two values of x again:
Guessed:
x  3.7  105
Calculated: x  3.3  105
These values are closer but not close enough. Next we try 3.3  105 as our guess:
x2  11.8  105 213.3  105 2  1.8  109  0
x2  1.8  109  5.9  1010  1.2  109

Thus
x  3.5  105
Again we compare:
Guessed:
x  3.3  105
Calculated: x  3.5  105
Next we guess x  3.5  105 to give

x2  11.8  105 213.5  105 2  1.8  109  0
x2  1.8  109  6.3  1010  1.2  109

Thus
x  3.5  105
Now the guessed value and the calculated value are the same; we have found the correct
solution. Note that this agrees with one of the roots found with the quadratic formula in
the ﬁrst method.
To further illustrate the method of successive approximations, we will solve Sample
Exercise 14.17 using this procedure. In solving for [H] for 0.010 M H2SO4, we obtain
the following expression:
1.2  102 

x10.010  x2
0.010  x

which can be rearranged to give
x  11.2  102 2 a

0.010  x
b
0.010  x

We will guess a value for x, substitute it into the right side of the equation, and then calculate a value for x. In guessing a value for x, we know it must be less than 0.010, since
a larger value will make the calculated value for x negative and the guessed and calculated values will never match. We start by guessing x  0.005.
The results of the successive approximations are shown in the following table:

Trial

Guessed
Value for x

Calculated
Value for x

1
2
3
4

0.0050
0.0040
0.00450
0.00452

0.0040
0.0051
0.00455
0.00453

Note that the ﬁrst guess was close to the actual value and that there was oscillation between 0.004 and 0.005 for the guessed and calculated values. For trial 3, an average of

A10

Appendixes
these values was used as the guess, and this led rapidly to the correct value (0.0045 to the
correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures). Also, note that it is useful to carry extra digits until the correct value is obtained. That value can then be rounded off to the correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
The method of successive approximations is especially useful for solving polynomials containing x to a power of 3 or higher. The procedure is the same as for quadratic
equations: Substitute a guessed value for x into the equation for every x term but one, and
then solve for x. Continue this process until the guessed and calculated values agree.

A1.5 Uncertainties in Measurements
Like all the physical sciences, chemistry is based on the results of measurements. Every
measurement has an inherent uncertainty, so if we are to use the results of measurements
to reach conclusions, we must be able to estimate the sizes of these uncertainties.
For example, the speciﬁcation for a commercial 500-mg acetaminophen (the active
painkiller in Tylenol) tablet is that each batch of tablets must contain 450 to 550 mg of acetaminophen per tablet. Suppose that chemical analysis gave the following results for a batch
of acetaminophen tablets: 428 mg, 479 mg, 442 mg, and 435 mg. How can we use these
results to decide if the batch of tablets meets the speciﬁcation? Although the details of how
to draw such conclusions from measured data are beyond the scope of this text, we will consider some aspects of how this is done. We will focus here on the types of experimental
uncertainty, the expression of experimental results, and a simpliﬁed method for estimating
experimental uncertainty when several types of measurement contribute to the ﬁnal result.

Types of Experimental Error
There are two types of experimental uncertainty (error). A variety of names are applied
to these types of errors:
Precision · random error
K indeterminate error
Accuracy · systematic error K determinate error
The difference between the two types of error is well illustrated by the attempts to hit a
target shown in Fig. 1.7 in Chapter 1.
Random error is associated with every measurement. To obtain the last signiﬁcant ﬁgure for any measurement, we must always make an estimate. For example, we interpolate
between the marks on a meter stick, a buret, or a balance. The precision of replicate measurements (repeated measurements of the same type) reﬂects the size of the random errors. Precision refers to the reproducibility of replicate measurements.
The accuracy of a measurement refers to how close it is to the true value. An inaccurate result occurs as a result of some ﬂaw (systematic error) in the measurement: the
presence of an interfering substance, incorrect calibration of an instrument, operator error, and so on. The goal of chemical analysis is to eliminate systematic error, but random
errors can only be minimized. In practice, an experiment is almost always done to ﬁnd an
unknown value (the true value is not known—someone is trying to obtain that value by
doing the experiment). In this case the precision of several replicate determinations is used
to assess the accuracy of the result. The results of the replicate experiments are expressed
as an average (which we assume is close to the true value) with an error limit that gives
some indication of how close the average value may be to the true value. The error limit
represents the uncertainty of the experimental result.

Expression of Experimental Results
If we perform several measurements, such as for the analysis for acetaminophen in
painkiller tablets, the results should express two things: the average of the measurements
and the size of the uncertainty.

Appendixes

A11

There are two common ways of expressing an average: the mean and the median. The
mean (x) is the arithmetic average of the results, or
n
x1  x2  p  xn
xi
Mean  x  a 
n
n
i1

where  means take the sum of the values. The mean is equal to the sum of all the measurements divided by the number of measurements. For the acetaminophen results given
previously, the mean is
x

428  479  442  435
 446 mg
4

The median is the value that lies in the middle among the results. Half the measurements are above the median and half are below the median. For results of 465 mg,
485 mg, and 492 mg, the median is 485 mg. When there is an even number of results,
the median is the average of the two middle results. For the acetaminophen results, the
median is
442  435
 438 mg
2
There are several advantages to using the median. If a small number of measurements
is made, one value can greatly affect the mean. Consider the results for the analysis of
acetaminophen: 428 mg, 479 mg, 442 mg, and 435 mg. The mean is 446 mg, which is
larger than three of the four weights. The median is 438 mg, which lies near the three values that are relatively close to one another.
In addition to expressing an average value for a series of results, we must express the
uncertainty. This usually means expressing either the precision of the measurements or
the observed range of the measurements. The range of a series of measurements is deﬁned by the smallest value and the largest value. For the analytical results on the acetaminophen tablets, the range is from 428 mg to 479 mg. Using this range, we can express
the results by saying that the true value lies between 428 mg and 479 mg. That is, we can
express the amount of acetaminophen in a typical tablet as 446  33 mg, where the error limit is chosen to give the observed range (approximately).
The most common way to specify precision is by the standard deviation, s, which for
a small number of measurements is given by the formula
2
a 1xi  x2 §
s  £ i1
n1
n

12

where xi is an individual result, x is the average (either mean or median), and n is the total number of measurements. For the acetaminophen example, we have
s c

1428  4462 2  1479  4462 2  1442  4462 2  1435  4462 2 1 2
d  23
41

Thus we can say the amount of acetaminophen in the typical tablet in the batch of tablets
is 446 mg with a sample standard deviation of 23 mg. Statistically this means that any
additional measurement has a 68% probability (68 chances out of 100) of being between
423 mg (446  23) and 469 mg (446  23). Thus the standard deviation is a measure
of the precision of a given type of determination.
The standard deviation gives us a means of describing the precision of a given type
of determination using a series of replicate results. However, it is also useful to be able to
estimate the precision of a procedure that involves several measurements by combining
the precisions of the individual steps. That is, we want to answer the following question:

A12

Appendixes
How do the uncertainties propagate when we combine the results of several different types
of measurements? There are many ways to deal with the propagation of uncertainty. We
will discuss only one simple method here.

A Simpliﬁed Method for Estimating Experimental Uncertainty
To illustrate this method, we will consider the determination of the density of an irregularly shaped solid. In this determination we make three measurements. First, we measure
the mass of the object on a balance. Next, we must obtain the volume of the solid. The
easiest method for doing this is to partially ﬁll a graduated cylinder with a liquid and
record the volume. Then we add the solid and record the volume again. The difference in
the measured volumes is the volume of the solid. We can then calculate the density of the
solid from the equation
D

M
V2  V1

where M is the mass of the solid, V1 is the initial volume of liquid in the graduated
cylinder, and V2 is the volume of liquid plus solid. Suppose we get the following
results:
M  23.06 g
V1  10.4 mL
V2  13.5 mL
The calculated density is
23.06 g
 7.44 g/mL
13.5 mL  10.4 mL
Now suppose that the precision of the balance used is 0.02 g and that the volume
measurements are precise to 0.05 mL. How do we estimate the uncertainty of the density? We can do this by assuming a worst case. That is, we assume the largest uncertainties in all measurements, and see what combinations of measurements will give the largest
and smallest possible results (the greatest range). Since the density is the mass divided by
the volume, the largest value of the density will be that obtained using the largest possible mass and the smallest possible volume:
Largest possible mass  23.06  .02

o

Dmax

23.08

 7.69 g/mL
13.45  10.45
p

r

Smallest possible V2

Largest possible V1

The smallest value of the density is
Smallest possible mass

o

23.04
Dmin 
 7.20 g/mL
13.35  10.35
p

Largest possible V2

r

Smallest possible V1

Thus the calculated range is from 7.20 to 7.69 and the average of these values is 7.44.
The error limit is the number that gives the high and low range values when added and
subtracted from the average. Therefore, we can express the density as 7.44  0.25 g/mL,
which is the average value plus or minus the quantity that gives the range calculated by
assuming the largest uncertainties.

Appendixes

A13

Analysis of the propagation of uncertainties is useful in drawing qualitative conclusions from the analysis of measurements. For example, suppose that we obtained the preceding results for the density of an unknown alloy and we want to know if it is one of
the following alloys:
Alloy A: D  7.58 g/mL
Alloy B: D  7.42 g/mL
Alloy C: D  8.56 g/mL
We can safely conclude that the alloy is not C. But the values of the densities for alloys
A and B are both within the inherent uncertainty of our method. To distinguish between
A and B, we need to improve the precision of our determination: The obvious choice is
to improve the precision of the volume measurement.
The worst-case method is very useful in estimating uncertainties when the results of
several measurements are combined to calculate a result. We assume the maximum uncertainty in each measurement and calculate the minimum and maximum possible result.
These extreme values describe the range and thus the error limit.

Appendix Two

L

L
L

FIGURE A.3
An ideal gas particle in a cube whose
sides are of length L. The particle collides
elastically with the walls in a random,
straight-line motion.

The Quantitative Kinetic Molecular Model
We have seen that the kinetic molecular model successfully accounts for the properties of
an ideal gas. This appendix will show in some detail how the postulates of the kinetic
molecular model lead to an equation corresponding to the experimentally obtained ideal
gas equation.
Recall that the particles of an ideal gas are assumed to be volumeless, to have no attraction for each other, and to produce pressure on their container by colliding with the
container walls.
Suppose there are n moles of an ideal gas in a cubical container with sides each of
length L. Assume each gas particle has a mass m and that it is in rapid, random, straightline motion colliding with the walls, as shown in Fig. A.3. The collisions will be assumed
to be elastic—no loss of kinetic energy occurs. We want to compute the force on the walls
from the colliding gas particles and then, since pressure is force per unit area, to obtain
an expression for the pressure of the gas.
Before we can derive the expression for the pressure of a gas, we must ﬁrst discuss
some characteristics of velocity. Each particle in the gas has a particular velocity u that
can be divided into components ux, uy, and uz, as shown in Fig. A.4. First, using ux and uy
and the Pythagorean theorem, we can obtain uxy as shown in Fig. A.4(c):
uxy2  ux2  uy2
p
Hypotenuse of
right triangle

r r
Sides of
right triangle

Then, constructing another triangle as shown in Fig. A.4(c), we ﬁnd
u2  uxy2  uz2
h

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

or

u  ux  uy2  uz2
2

2

Now let’s consider how an “average” gas particle moves. For example, how often does
this particle strike the two walls of the box that are perpendicular to the x axis? It is important to realize that only the x component of the velocity affects the particle’s impacts on these
two walls, as shown in Fig. A.5(a). The larger the x component of the velocity, the faster the
particle travels between these two walls, and the more impacts per unit of time it will make
on these walls. Remember, the pressure of the gas is due to these collisions with the walls.

A14

Appendixes

z

u
uz

u
y

L

uz

uz
uxy

uy
ux

uy

L

x

ux

L
(b)

(a)

FIGURE A.4
(a) The Cartesian coordinate axes.

uy

(c)

(b) The velocity u of any gas particle can
be broken down into three mutually
perpendicular components, ux, uy,
and uz. This can be represented as a
rectangular solid with sides ux, uy, and
uz and body diagonal u.

(c) In the xy plane,
ux2  uy2  uxy2
by the Pythagorean theorem. Since uxy
and ux are also perpendicular,
u2  uxy2  uz2  ux2  uy2  uz2

The collision frequency (collisions per unit of time) with the two walls that are
perpendicular to the x axis is given by

z

1Collision frequency2 x 

velocity in the x direction
distance between the walls
ux

L

u
ux
L

Next, what is the force of a collision? Force is deﬁned as mass times acceleration
(change in velocity per unit of time):
L

x
L
(a)

F  ma  ma

¢u
b
¢t

where F represents force, a represents acceleration, u represents a change in velocity, and
t represents a given length of time.
Since we assume that the particle has constant mass, we can write

z

ux

F

u
−ux
−u
x
(b)

FIGURE A.5
(a) Only the x component of the gas
particle’s velocity affects the frequency of
impacts on the shaded walls, the walls
that are perpendicular to the x axis.
(b) For an elastic collision, there is an exact
reversal of the x component of the velocity
and of the total velocity. The change in
momentum (ﬁnal  initial) is then
mux  mux  2mux

¢1mu2
m¢u

¢t
¢t

The quantity mu is the momentum of the particle (momentum is the product of mass and
velocity), and the expression F  (mu) t implies that force is the change in momentum per unit of time. When a particle hits a wall perpendicular to the x axis, as shown in
Fig. A.5(b), an elastic collision results in an exact reversal of the x component of velocity. That is, the sign, or direction, of ux reverses when the particle collides with one of the
walls perpendicular to the x axis. Thus the ﬁnal momentum is the negative, or opposite,
of the initial momentum. Remember that an elastic collision means that there is no change
in the magnitude of the velocity. The change in momentum in the x direction is then
Change in momentum  ¢1mux 2  final momentum  initial momentum
 mux  mux
p
Final
momentum
in x direction

 2mux

r
Initial
momentum
in x direction

Appendixes

A15

But we are interested in the force the gas particle exerts on the walls of the box. Since
we know that every action produces an equal but opposite reaction, the change in momentum with respect to the wall on impact is (2mux), or 2mux.
Recall that since force is the change in momentum per unit of time,
Forcex 

¢1mux 2
¢t

for the walls perpendicular to the x axis.
This expression can be obtained by multiplying the change in momentum per impact by the number of impacts per unit of time:
ux
Forcex  12mux 2 a b  change in momentum per unit of time
L
p
Change in momentum
per impact

r
Impacts per
unit of time

That is,
Forcex 

2mux2
L

So far we have considered only the two walls of the box perpendicular to the x axis.
We can assume that the force on the two walls perpendicular to the y axis is given by
Forcey 

2muy2
L

and that on the two walls perpendicular to the z axis by
Forcez 

2muz2
L

Since we have shown that
u2  ux2  uy2  uz2
the total force on the box is
Force TOTAL  forcex  forcey  forcez
2muy2
2muz2
2mux2



L
L
L
2m 2
2m 2

1u  uy2  uz2 2 
1u 2
L x
L
Now since we want the average force, we use the average of the square of the velocity 1u2 2 to obtain
Force TOTAL 

2m 2
1u 2
L

Next, we need to compute the pressure (force per unit of area)
force TOTAL
area TOTAL
2mu2
L
mu2

2 
6L
3L3

Pressure due to “average” particle 

p
The 6 sides
of the cube

r
Area of
each side

A16

Appendixes
Since the volume V of the cube is equal to L3, we can write
Pressure  P 

mu2
3V

So far we have considered the pressure on the walls due to a single, “average” particle. Of course, we want the pressure due to the entire gas sample. The number of particles in a given gas sample can be expressed as follows:
Number of gas particles  nNA
where n is the number of moles and NA is Avogadro’s number.
The total pressure on the box due to n moles of a gas is therefore
P  nNA

mu2
3V

Next we want to express the pressure in terms of the kinetic energy of the gas molecules. Kinetic energy (the energy due to motion) is given by 12 mu2, where m is the mass
and u is the velocity. Since we are using the average of the velocity squared 1u2 2, and
since mu2  21 12 mu2 2, we have
2 nNA1 2 mu2 2
Pa b
3
V
1

or
PV
2
 a bNA 1 12 mu2 2
n
3
Thus, based on the postulates of the kinetic molecular model, we have been able to
derive an equation that has the same form as the ideal gas equation,
PV
 RT
n
This agreement between experiment and theory supports the validity of the assumptions
made in the kinetic molecular model about the behavior of gas particles, at least for the
limiting case of an ideal gas.

Appendix Three

Spectral Analysis
Although volumetric and gravimetric analyses are still very commonly used, spectroscopy is
the technique most often used for modern chemical analysis. Spectroscopy is the study of electromagnetic radiation emitted or absorbed by a given chemical species. Since the quantity of
radiation absorbed or emitted can be related to the quantity of the absorbing or emitting species
present, this technique can be used for quantitative analysis. There are many spectroscopic
techniques, as electromagnetic radiation spans a wide range of energies to include X rays, ultraviolet, infrared, and visible light, and microwaves, to name a few of its familiar forms. We
will consider here only one procedure, which is based on the absorption of visible light.
If a liquid is colored, it is because some component of the liquid absorbs visible light.
In a solution the greater the concentration of the light-absorbing substance, the more light
absorbed, and the more intense the color of the solution.
The quantity of light absorbed by a substance can be measured by a spectrophotometer, shown schematically in Fig. A.6. This instrument consists of a source that emits
all wavelengths of light in the visible region (wavelengths of 400 to 700 nm); a monochromator, which selects a given wavelength of light; a sample holder for the solution

Appendixes

A17

l

I0

Source

I

Monochromator

Sample

Detector

FIGURE A.6
A schematic diagram of a simple spectrophotometer. The source emits all wavelengths of visible
light, which are dispersed using a prism or grating and then focused, one wavelength at a time,
onto the sample. The detector compares the intensity of the incident light (I0) to the intensity of
the light after it has passed through the sample (l).

being measured; and a detector, which compares the intensity of incident light I0 to the
intensity of light after it has passed through the sample I. The ratio II0, called the transmittance, is a measure of the fraction of light that passes through the sample. The amount
of light absorbed is given by the absorbance A, where
A  log

I
I0

The absorbance can be expressed by the Beer–Lambert law:
A  ⑀lc
where ⑀ is the molar absorptivity or the molar extinction coefﬁcient (in L/mol  cm), l is
the distance the light travels through the solution (in cm), and c is the concentration of
the absorbing species (in mol/L). The Beer–Lambert law is the basis for using spectroscopy
in quantitative analysis. If ⑀ and l are known, measuring A for a solution allows us to calculate the concentration of the absorbing species in the solution.
Suppose we have a pink solution containing an unknown concentration of Co2(aq)
ions. A sample of this solution is placed in a spectrophotometer, and the absorbance is
measured at a wavelength where ⑀ for Co2(aq) is known to be 12 L/mol  cm. The absorbance A is found to be 0.60. The width of the sample tube is 1.0 cm. We want to determine the concentration of Co2(aq) in the solution. This problem can be solved by a
straightforward application of the Beer–Lambert law,
A  ⑀lc
where
A  0.60
12 L
⑀
mol  cm
l  light path  1.0 cm
Solving for the concentration gives
c

A

⑀l

0.60
 5.0  102 mol/L
L
a12
b 11.0 cm2
mol  cm

To obtain the unknown concentration of an absorbing species from the measured absorbance, we must know the product ⑀l, since
c

A
⑀l

A18

Appendixes
We can obtain the product ⑀l by measuring the absorbance of a solution of known concentration, since
Measured using a
o spectrophotometer

A
c

⑀l 

r Known from making up
the solution

However, a more accurate value of the product ⑀l can be obtained by plotting A versus
c for a series of solutions. Note that the equation A  ⑀lc gives a straight line with slope
⑀l when A is plotted against c.
For example, consider the following typical spectroscopic analysis. A sample of steel
from a bicycle frame is to be analyzed to determine its manganese content. The procedure involves weighing out a sample of the steel, dissolving it in strong acid, treating the
resulting solution with a very strong oxidizing agent to convert all the manganese to permanganate ion (MnO4), and then using spectroscopy to determine the concentration of
the intensely purple MnO4 ions in the solution. To do this, however, the value of ⑀l for
MnO4 must be determined at an appropriate wavelength. The absorbance values for four
solutions with known MnO4 concentrations were measured to give the following data:

Solution

Concentration of
MnO4 (mol/L)

1
2
3
4

7.00
1.00
2.00
3.50






Absorbance

105
104
104
104

0.175
0.250
0.500
0.875

A plot of absorbance versus concentration for the solutions of known concentration is shown
in Fig. A.7. The slope of this line (change in Achange in c) is 2.48  103 L/mol. This quantity represents the product ⑀l.
A sample of the steel weighing 0.1523 g was dissolved and the unknown amount of
manganese was converted to MnO4 ions. Water was then added to give a solution with
a ﬁnal volume of 100.0 mL. A portion of this solution was placed in a spectrophotometer,

1.00
0.90
0.780
0.80
0.70
Absorbance

Slope =
0.60
0.50

0.558
2.25 × 10 – 4

= 2.48 × 103

A = 0.558

0.40
0.30
C = 2.25 × 10 – 4

0.20

3.15 × 10 – 4

0.10

FIGURE A.7
A plot of absorbance versus concentration
of MnO4 in a series of solutions of known
concentration.

0

1.0 × 10 – 4

2.0 × 10 – 4
Concentration (mol/L)

3.0 × 10 – 4

A19

Appendixes

and its absorbance was found to be 0.780. Using these data, we want to calculate the percent manganese in the steel. The MnO4 ions from the manganese in the dissolved steel
sample show an absorbance of 0.780. Using the Beer–Lambert law, we calculate the concentration of MnO4 in this solution:
c

A
0.780
 3.15  104 mol/L

⑀l
2.48  103 L/mol

There is a more direct way for ﬁnding c. Using a graph such as that in Fig. A.7 (often called a Beer’s law plot), we can read the concentration that corresponds to A 
0.780. This interpolation is shown by dashed lines on the graph. By this method, c 
3.15  104 mol/L, which agrees with the value obtained above.
Recall that the original 0.1523-g steel sample was dissolved, the manganese was converted to permanganate, and the volume was adjusted to 100.0 mL. We now know that
[MnO4] in that solution is 3.15  104 M. Using this concentration, we can calculate
the total number of moles of MnO4 in that solution:
1L
mol
 3.15  104
1000 mL
L
5
 3.15  10 mol

mol of MnO4   100.0 mL 

Since each mole of manganese in the original steel sample yields a mole of MnO4, that is,
Oxidation

1 mol of Mn 88888888n 1 mol of MnO4
the original steel sample must have contained 3.15  105 mol of manganese. The mass
of manganese present in the sample is
3.15  105 mol of Mn 

54.938 g of Mn
 1.73  103 g of Mn
1 mol of Mn

Since the steel sample weighed 0.1523 g, the present manganese in the steel is
1.73  103 g of Mn
 100  1.14%
1.523  101 g of sample
This example illustrates a typical use of spectroscopy in quantitative analysis. The
steps commonly involved are as follows:
1. Preparation of a calibration plot (a Beer’s law plot) by measuring the absorbance
values of a series of solutions with known concentrations.
2. Measurement of the absorbance of the solution of unknown concentration.
3. Use of the calibration plot to determine the unknown concentration.

Appendix Four

Selected Thermodynamic Data

Note: All values are assumed precise to at least 1.
Substance
and State

¢Hf
1kJ/mol2

¢Gf
1kJ/mol2

Aluminum
Al(s)
Al2O3(s)
Al(OH)3(s)
AlCl3(s)

0
1676
1277
704

0
1582

28
51

629

111

S
1J/K  mol2

Substance
and State

¢Hf
1kJ/mol2

¢Gf
1kJ/mol2

Barium
Ba(s)
BaCO3(s)
BaO(s)
Ba(OH)2(s)

0
1219
582
946

0
1139
552

S
1J/K  mol2
67
112
70

(continued)

A20

Appendixes

Appendix Four (continued)
Substance
and State

¢Hf
1kJ/mol2

¢Gf
1kJ/mol2

Barium, continued
BaSO4(s)

1465

1353

132

Beryllium
Be(s)
BeO(s)
Be(OH)2(s)

0
599
904

0
569
815

10
14
47

Bromine
Br2(l)
Br2(g)
Br2(aq)
Br(aq)
HBr(g)

0
31
3
121
36

0
3
4
104
53

152
245
130
82
199

Cadmium
Cd(s)
CdO(s)
Cd(OH)2(s)
CdS(s)
CdSO4(s)

0
258
561
162
935

0
228
474
156
823

52
55
96
65
123

Calcium
Ca(s)
CaC2(s)
CaCO3(s)
CaO(s)
Ca(OH)2(s)
Ca3(PO4)2(s)
CaSO4(s)
CaSiO3(s)

0
63
1207
635
987
4126
1433
1630

0
68
1129
604
899
3890
1320
1550

41
70
93
40
83
241
107
84

Carbon
C(s) (graphite)
C(s) (diamond)
CO(g)
CO2(g)
CH4(g)
CH3OH(g)
CH3OH(l)
H2CO(g)
HCOOH(g)
HCN(g)
C2H2(g)
C2H4(g)
CH3CHO(g)
C2H5OH(l)
C2H6(g)
C3H6(g)
C3H8(g)
C2H4O(g) (ethylene oxide)
CH2PCHCN(g)
CH3COOH(l)
C6H12O6(s)
CCl4

0
2
110.5
393.5
75
201
239
116
363
135.1
227
52
166
278
84.7
20.9
104
53
185.0
484
1275
135

Chlorine
Cl2(g)
Cl2(aq)

0
23

0
3
137
394
51
163
166
110
351
125
209
68
129
175
32.9
62.7
24
13
195.4
389
911
65
0
7

S
1J/K  mol2

6
2
198
214
186
240
127
219
249
202
201
219
250
161
229.5
266.9
270
242
274
160
212
216
223
121

Substance
and State

¢Hf
1kJ/mol2

¢Gf
1kJ/mol2

Chlorine, continued
Cl(aq)
HCl(g)

167
92

131
95

57
187

0
1128
579

0
1047
502

24
81
72

0
595
170
156
450
49

0
518
148
128
372
49

33
88
93
43
108
67

Fluorine
F2(g)
F(aq)
HF(g)

0
333
271

0
279
273

203
14
174

Hydrogen
H2(g)
H(g)
H(aq)
OH(aq)
H2O(l)
H2O(g)

0
217
0
230
286
242

0
203
0
157
237
229

131
115
0
11
70
189

0
62
23
55

0
19
16
52

116
261
137
106

0
21
264
272
1117
826
95
178
929

0
15
240
255
1013
740
97
166
825

27
108
59
61
146
90
67
53
121

0
277
100
920

0
217
99
813

65
69
91
149

0
1113
602
925

0
1029
569
834

33
66
27
64

0

0

32

Chromium
Cr(s)
Cr2O3(s)
CrO3(s)
Copper
Cu(s)
CuCO3(s)
Cu2O(s)
CuO(s)
Cu(OH)2(s)
CuS(s)

Iodine
I2(s)
I2(g)
I2(aq)
I(aq)
Iron
Fe(s)
Fe3C(s)
Fe0.95O(s) (wustite)
FeO
Fe3O4(s) (magnetite)
Fe2O3(s) (hematite)
FeS(s)
FeS2(s)
FeSO4(s)
Lead
Pb(s)
PbO2(s)
PbS(s)
PbSO4(s)
Magnesium
Mg(s)
MgCO3(s)
MgO(s)
Mg(OH)2(s)
Manganese
Mn(s)

S
1J/K  mol2

A21

Appendixes
Appendix Four (continued)
Substance
and State

¢Hf
1kJ/mol2

¢Gf
1kJ/mol2

Manganese, continued
MnO(s)
Mn3O4(s)
Mn2O3(s)
MnO2(s)
MnO4(aq)

385
1387
971
521
543

363
1280
893
466
449

60
149
110
53
190

Mercury
Hg(l)
Hg2Cl2(s)
HgCl2(s)
HgO(s)
HgS(s)

0
265
230
90
58

0
211
184
59
49

76
196
144
70
78

Nickel
Ni(s)
NiCl2(s)
NiO(s)
Ni(OH)2(s)
NiS(s)

0
316
241
538
93

0
272
213
453
90

30
107
38
79
53

Nitrogen
N2(g)
NH3(g)
NH3(aq)
NH4(aq)
NO(g)
NO2(g)
N2O(g)
N2O4(g)
N2O4(l)
N2O5(s)
N2H4(l)
N2H3CH3(l)
HNO3(aq)
HNO3(l)
NH4ClO4(s)
NH4Cl(s)

0
46
80
132
90
34
82
10
20
42
51
54
207
174
295
314

0
17
27
79
87
52
104
98
97
134
149
180
111
81
89
203

192
193
111
113
211
240
220
304
209
178
121
166
146
156
186
96

0
249
143

0
232
163

205
161
239

0
18
39
59
1578
5
1279
1267
1288
2984

0
12
33
24
1509
13
1119
—
1143
2698

41
23
23
280
296
210
110
—
158
229

0
436

0
408

64
83

Oxygen
O2(g)
O(g)
O3(g)
Phosphorus
P(s) (white)
P(s) (red)
P(s) (black)
P4(g)
PF5(g)
PH3(g)
H3PO4(s)
H3PO4(l)
H3PO4(aq)
P4O10(s)
Potassium
K(s)
KCl(s)

S
1J/K  mol2

Substance
and State

¢Hf
1kJ/mol2

¢Gf
1kJ/mol2

S
1J/K  mol2

Potassium, continued
KClO3(s)
KClO4(s)
K2O(s)
K2O2(s)
KO2(s)
KOH(s)
KOH(aq)

391
433
361
496
283
425
481

290
304
322
430
238
379
440

143
151
98
113
117
79
9.20

Silicon
SiO2(s) (quartz)
SiCl4(l)

911
687

856
620

42
240

Silver
Ag(s)
Ag(aq)
AgBr(s)
AgCN(s)
AgCl(s)
Ag2CrO4(s)
AgI(s)
Ag2O(s)
Ag2S(s)

0
105
100
146
127
712
62
31
32

0
77
97
164
110
622
66
11
40

43
73
107
84
96
217
115
122
146

Sodium
Na(s)
Na(aq)
NaBr(s)
Na2CO3(s)
NaHCO3(s)
NaCl(s)
NaH(s)
NaI(s)
NaNO2(s)
NaNO3(s)
Na2O(s)
Na2O2(s)
NaOH(s)
NaOH(aq)

0
240
360
1131
948
411
56
288
359
467
416
515
427
470

0
262
347
1048
852
384
33
282

51
59
84
136
102
72
40
91

366
377
451
381
419

116
73
95
64
50

Sulfur
S(s) (rhombic)
S(s) (monoclinic)
S2(aq)
S8(g)
SF6(g)
H2S(g)
SO2(g)
SO3(g)
SO42(aq)
H2SO4(l)
H2SO4(aq)

0
0.3
33
102
1209
21
297
396
909
814
909

0
0.1
86
50
1105
34
300
371
745
690
745

32
33
15
431
292
206
248
257
20
157
20

0
2
285
581

0
0.1
257
520

52
44
56
52

Tin
Sn(s) (white)
Sn(s) (gray)
SnO(s)
SnO2(s)

(continued)

A22

Appendixes

Appendix Four (continued)
Substance
and State

¢Hf
1kJ/mol2

¢Gf
1kJ/mol2

S
1J/K  mol2

Tin, continued
Sn(OH)2(s)

561

492

155

Titanium
TiCl4(g)
TiO2(s)

763
945

727
890

355
50

Uranium
U(s)
UF6(s)
UF6(g)
UO2(s)
U3O8(s)
UO3(s)

0
2137
2113
1084
3575
1230

0
2008
2029
1029
3393
1150

50
228
380
78
282
99

Appendix Five

Substance
and State
Xenon
Xe(g)
XeF2(g)
XeF4(s)
XeF6(g)
XeO3(s)
Zinc
Zn(s)
ZnO(s)
Zn(OH)2(s)
ZnS(s) (wurtzite)
ZnS(s) (zinc blende)
ZnSO4(s)

¢Hf
1kJ/mol2

¢Gf
1kJ/mol2

0
108
251
294
402

0
48
121

170
254
146

0
348
642
193
206
983

0
318

42
44

201
874

58
120

S
1J/K  mol2

Equilibrium Constants and
Reduction Potentials
A5.1 Values of Ka for Some Common Monoprotic Acids

Name

Formula

Hydrogen sulfate ion
Chlorous acid
Monochloracetic acid
Hydroﬂuoric acid
Nitrous acid
Formic acid
Lactic acid
Benzoic acid
Acetic acid
Hydrated aluminum(III) ion
Propanoic acid
Hypochlorous acid
Hypobromous acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Boric acid
Ammonium ion
Phenol
Hypoiodous acid



HSO4
HClO2
HC2H2ClO2
HF
HNO2
HCO2H
HC3H5O3
HC7H5O2
HC2H3O2
[Al(H2O)6]3
HC3H5O2
HOCl
HOBr
HCN
H3BO3
NH4
HOC6H5
HOI

Value of Ka
1.2 
1.2 
1.35 
7.2 
4.0 
1.8 
1.38 
6.4 
1.8 
1.4 
1.3 
3.5 
2 
6.2 
5.8 
5.6 
1.6 
2 

102
102
103
104
104
104
104
105
105
105
105
108
109
1010
1010
1010
1010
1011

A23

Appendixes

A5.2 Stepwise Dissociation Constants for Several
Common Polyprotic Acids
Name

Ka 1

Formula

Phosphoric acid
Arsenic acid
Carbonic acid
Sulfuric acid
Sulfurous acid
Hydrosulfuric acid
Oxalic acid
Ascorbic acid
(vitamin C)
Citric acid

Ka 2
3

Ka 3
8

H3PO4
H3AsO4
H2CO3
H2SO4
H2SO3
H2S
H2C2O4
H2C6H6O6

7.5  10
5  103
4.3  107
Large
1.5  102
1.0  107
6.5  102
7.9  105

6.2  10
8  108
5.6  1011
1.2  102
1.0  107
1019
6.1  105
1.6  1012

4.8  1013
6  1010

H3C6H5O7

8.4  104

1.8  105

4.0  106

A5.3 Values of Kb for Some Common Weak Bases
Name
Ammonia
Methylamine
Ethylamine
Diethylamine
Triethylamine
Hydroxylamine
Hydrazine
Aniline
Pyridine

Conjugate
Formula
NH3
CH3NH2
C2H5NH2
(C2H5)2NH
(C2H5)3N
HONH2
H2NNH2
C6H5NH2
C5H5N

Kb

Acid


NH4
CH3NH3
C2H5NH3
(C2H5)2NH2
(C2H5)3NH
HONH3
H2NNH3
C6H5NH3
C5H5NH

1.8
4.38
5.6
1.3
4.0
1.1
3.0
3.8
1.7











105
104
104
103
104
108
106
1010
109

A24

Appendixes

A5.4 Ksp Values at 25°C for Common Ionic Solids
Ionic Solid

Ksp (at 25°C)

Fluorides
BaF2
MgF2
PbF2
SrF2
CaF2

2.4
6.4
4
7.9
4.0

Chlorides
PbCl2
AgCl
Hg2Cl2*

1.6  105
1.6  1010
1.1  1018

Bromides
PbBr2
AgBr
Hg2Br2*
Iodides
PbI2
AgI
Hg2I2*
Sulfates
CaSO4
Ag2SO4
SrSO4
PbSO4
BaSO4
Chromates
SrCrO4







5

10
109
108
1010
1011

4.6  106
5.0  1013
1.3  1022
1.4  108
1.5  1016
4.5  1029
6.1
1.2
3.2
1.3
1.5







105
105
107
108
109

3.6  105

Ionic Solid

Ksp (at 25°C)
9

2
8.5
9.0
2






10
1011
1012
1016

Carbonates
NiCO3
CaCO3
BaCO3
SrCO3
CuCO3
ZnCO3
MnCO3
FeCO3
Ag2CO3
CdCO3
PbCO3
MgCO3
Hg2CO3*

1.4
8.7
1.6
7
2.5
2
8.8
2.1
8.1
5.2
1.5
1
9.0















107
109
109
1010
1010
1010
1011
1011
1012
1012
1015
105
1015

Hydroxides
Ba(OH)2
Sr(OH)2
Ca(OH)2
AgOH
Mg(OH)2
Mn(OH)2
Cd(OH)2
Pb(OH)2
Fe(OH)2

5.0
3.2
1.3
2.0
8.9
2
5.9
1.2
1.8











103
104
106
108
1012
1013
1015
1015
1015

Hg2CrO4*
BaCrO4
Ag2CrO4
PbCrO4

*Contains Hg22 ions. Ksp  [Hg22][X]2 for Hg2X2 salts.

Ionic Solid

Ksp (at 25°C)
2.5
1.6
4.5
1.6
3
3
6.7
2
4
2.5












1016
1016
1017
1019
1026
1027
1031
1032
1038
1043

Sulﬁdes
MnS
FeS
NiS
CoS
ZnS
SnS
CdS
PbS
CuS
Ag2S
HgS

2.3
3.7
3
5
2.5
1
1.0
7
8.5
1.6
1.6













1013
1019
1021
1022
1022
1026
1028
1029
1045
1049
1054

Phosphates
Ag3PO4
Sr3(PO4)2
Ca3(PO4)2
Ba3(PO4)2
Pb3(PO4)2

1.8
1
1.3
6
1







1018
1031
1032
1039
1054

Co(OH)2
Ni(OH)2
Zn(OH)2
Cu(OH)2
Hg(OH)2
Sn(OH)2
Cr(OH)3
Al(OH)3
Fe(OH)3
Co(OH)3

Appendixes

A25

A5.5 Standard Reduction Potentials at 25°C (298 K) for
Many Common Half-Reactions
Half-Reaction
F2  2e n 2F
Ag2  e n Ag
Co3  e n Co2
H2O2  2H  2e n 2H2O
Ce4  e n Ce3
PbO2  4H  SO42  2e n PbSO4  2H2O
MnO4  4H  3e n MnO2  2H2O
2e  2H  IO4 n IO3  H2O
MnO4  8H  5e n Mn2  4H2O
Au3  3e n Au
PbO2  4H  2e n Pb2  2H2O
Cl2  2e n 2Cl
Cr2O72  14H  6e n 2Cr3  7H2O
O2  4H  4e n 2H2O
MnO2  4H  2e n Mn2  2H2O
IO3  6H  5e n 12I2  3H2O
Br2  2e n 2Br
VO2  2H  e n VO2  H2O
AuCl4  3e n Au  4Cl
NO3  4H  3e n NO  2H2O
ClO2  e n ClO2
2Hg2  2e n Hg22
Ag  e n Ag
Hg22  2e n 2Hg
Fe3  e n Fe2
O2  2H  2e n H2O2
MnO4  e n MnO42
I2  2e n 2I
Cu  e n Cu

e° ( V )

Half-Reaction

e° ( V )

2.87
1.99
1.82
1.78
1.70
1.69
1.68
1.60
1.51
1.50
1.46
1.36
1.33
1.23
1.21
1.20
1.09
1.00
0.99
0.96
0.954
0.91
0.80
0.80
0.77
0.68
0.56
0.54
0.52

O2  2H2O  4e n 4OH
Cu2  2e n Cu
Hg2Cl2  2e n 2Hg  2Cl
AgCl  e n Ag  Cl
SO42  4H  2e n H2SO3  H2O
Cu2  e n Cu
2H  2e n H2
Fe3  3e n Fe
Pb2  2e n Pb
Sn2  2e n Sn
Ni2  2e n Ni
PbSO4  2e n Pb  SO42
Cd2  2e n Cd
Fe2  2e n Fe
Cr3  e n Cr2
Cr3  3e n Cr
Zn2  2e n Zn
2H2O  2e n H2  2OH
Mn2  2e n Mn
Al3  3e n Al
H2  2e n 2H
Mg2  2e n Mg
La3  3e n La
Na  e n Na
Ca2  2e n Ca
Ba2  2e n Ba
K  e n K
Li  e n Li

0.40
0.34
0.34
0.22
0.20
0.16
0.00
0.036
0.13
0.14
0.23
0.35
0.40
0.44
0.50
0.73
0.76
0.83
1.18
1.66
2.23
2.37
2.37
2.71
2.76
2.90
2.92
3.05

A26

Appendixes

SI Units and Conversion Factors

Appendix Six
Length

Mass

SI unit: meter (m)

SI unit: kilogram (kg)

1 meter
 1.0936 yards
1 centimeter  0.39370 inch
1 inch
 2.54 centimeters 
(exactly)
1 kilometer  0.62137 mile
1 mile
 5280 feet
 1.6093 kilometers
1 angstrom  1010 meter
 100 picometers

1 kilogram 

1 pound



1 ton


1 metric ton 

1 atomic
mass unit 

Volume



1 gallon 


1 quart 

1 liter

SI unit: kelvin (K)
0 K  273.15°C
 459.67°F
K  °C  273.15
5
°C  (°F  32)
9
9
°F  (°C)  32
5

3

10 m
1 dm3
1.0567 quarts
4 quarts
8 pints
3.7854 liters
32 ﬂuid ounces
0.94633 liter

Energy

Pressure

SI unit: joule (J)

SI unit: pascal (Pa)

 1 kg  m2/s2
 0.23901 calorie
 9.4781  104 btu
(British thermal unit)
1 calorie  4.184 joules
 3.965  103 btu
1 btu
 1055.06 joules
 252.2 calories
1 joule

1.66056  1027 kilograms

Temperature

SI unit: cubic meter (m3)
3

1000 grams
2.2046 pounds
453.59 grams
0.45359 kilogram
16 ounces
2000 pounds
907.185 kilograms
1000 kilograms
2204.6 pounds



1 atmosphere 


1 pascal

1 bar

1 N/m2
1 kg/m  s2
101.325 kilopascals
760 torr (mmHg)
14.70 pounds per
square inch
 105 pascals

Glossary
Accuracy the agreement of a particular value with the true value. (1.4)
Acid a substance that produces hydrogen ions in solution; a proton
donor. (2.8; 4.2; 4.8)
Acid–base indicator a substance that marks the end point of an
acid–base titration by changing color. (15.5)
Acid dissociation constant (Ka ) the equilibrium constant for a
reaction in which a proton is removed from an acid by H2O to form
the conjugate base and H3O. (14.1)
Acid rain a result of air pollution by sulfur dioxide. (5.10)
Acidic oxide a covalent oxide that dissolves in water to give an acidic
solution. (14.10)
Actinide series a group of 14 elements following actinium in the
periodic table, in which the 5f orbitals are being ﬁlled. (7.11;
19.1)
Activated complex (transition state) the arrangement of atoms
found at the top of the potential energy barrier as a reaction proceeds from reactants to products. (12.7)
Activation energy the threshold energy that must be overcome to
produce a chemical reaction. (12.7)
Addition polymerization a type of polymerization in which the
monomers simply add together to form the polymer, with no other
products. (22.5)
Addition reaction a reaction in which atoms add to a carbon–
carbon multiple bond. (22.2)
Adsorption the collection of one substance on the surface of another.
(12.8)
Air pollution contamination of the atmosphere, mainly by the gaseous
products of transportation and production of electricity. (5.10)
Alcohol an organic compound in which the hydroxyl group is a substituent on a hydrocarbon. (22.4)
Aldehyde an organic compound containing the carbonyl group
bonded to at least one hydrogen atom. (22.4)
Alkali metal a Group 1A metal. (2.7; 19.2)
Alkaline earth metal a Group 2A metal. (2.7; 19.4)
Alkane a saturated hydrocarbon with the general formula CnH2n  2.
(22.1)
Alkene an unsaturated hydrocarbon containing a carbon–carbon
double bond. The general formula is CnH2n. (22.2)
Alkyne an unsaturated hydrocarbon containing a triple carbon–
carbon bond. The general formula is CnH2n2. (22.2)
Alloy a substance that contains a mixture of elements and has metallic properties. (10.4)
Alloy steel a form of steel containing carbon plus other metals such
as chromium, cobalt, manganese, and molybdenum. (21.8)
Alpha (␣) particle a helium nucleus. (18.1)
Alpha-particle production a common mode of decay for radio-active
nuclides in which the mass number changes. (18.1)
Amine an organic base derived from ammonia in which one or more
of the hydrogen atoms are replaced by organic groups. (14.6; 22.4)
␣-Amino acid an organic acid in which an amino group and an R group
are attached to the carbon atom next to the carboxyl group. (22.6)

Amorphous solid a solid with considerable disorder in its structure.
(10.3)
Ampere the unit of electric current equal to one coulomb of charge
per second. (17.7)
Amphoteric substance a substance that can behave either as an acid
or as a base. (14.2)
Angular momentum quantum number (/ ) the quantum number
relating to the shape of an atomic orbital, which can assume any
integral value from 0 to n  1 for each value of n. (7.6)
Anion a negative ion. (2.6)
Anode the electrode in a galvanic cell at which oxidation occurs.
(17.1)
Antibonding molecular orbital an orbital higher in energy than the
atomic orbitals of which it is composed. (9.2)
Aqueous solution a solution in which water is the dissolving medium
or solvent. (4)
Aromatic hydrocarbon one of a special class of cyclic unsaturated
hydrocarbons, the simplest of which is benzene. (22.3)
Arrhenius concept a concept postulating that acids produce hydrogen ions in aqueous solution, while bases produce hydroxide ions.
(14.1)
Arrhenius equation the equation representing the rate constant as
k  AeEaRT, where A represents the product of the collision frequency and the steric factor, and eEaRT is the fraction of collisions
with sufﬁcient energy to produce a reaction. (12.7)
Atactic chain a polymer chain in which the substituent groups such
as CH3 are randomly distributed along the chain. (22.5)
Atmosphere the mixture of gases that surrounds the earth’s surface.
(5.10)
Atomic number the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom.
(2.5; 18)
Atomic radius half the distance between the nuclei in a molecule
consisting of identical atoms. (7.12)
Atomic solid a solid that contains atoms at the lattice points. (10.3)
Atomic weight the weighted average mass of the atoms in a naturally
occurring element. (2.3)
Aufbau principle the principle stating that as protons are added one
by one to the nucleus to build up the elements, electrons are similarly added to hydrogen-like orbitals. (7.11)
Autoionization the transfer of a proton from one molecule to
another of the same substance. (14.2)
Avogadro’s law equal volumes of gases at the same temperature and
pressure contain the same number of particles. (5.2)
Avogadro’s number the number of atoms in exactly 12 grams of
pure 12C, equal to 6.022  1023. (3.3)
Ball-and-stick model a molecular model that distorts the sizes of
atoms but shows bond relationships clearly. (2.6)
Band model a molecular model for metals in which the electrons are
assumed to travel around the metal crystal in molecular orbitals
formed from the valence atomic orbitals of the metal atoms. (10.4)

A27

A28

Glossary

Barometer a device for measuring atmospheric pressure. (5.1)
Base a substance that produces hydroxide ions in aqueous solution,
a proton acceptor. (4.8)
Basic oxide an ionic oxide that dissolves in water to produce a basic
solution. (14.10)
Basic oxygen process a process for producing steel by oxidizing and
removing the impurities in iron using a high-pressure blast of oxygen. (21.8)
Battery a group of galvanic cells connected in series. (17.5)
Beta ( ␤) particle an electron produced in radioactive decay. (18.1)
Beta-particle production a decay process for radioactive nuclides in
which the mass number remains constant and the atomic number
changes. The net effect is to change a neutron to a proton. (18.1)
Bidentate ligand a ligand that can form two bonds to a metal ion.
(21.3)
Bimolecular step a reaction involving the collision of two molecules. (12.6)
Binary compound a two-element compound. (2.8)
Binding energy (nuclear) the energy required to decompose a
nucleus into its component nucleons. (18.5)
Biomolecule a molecule responsible for maintaining and/or reproducing life. (22)
Blast furnace a furnace in which iron oxide is reduced to iron metal
by using a very strong blast of hot air to produce carbon monoxide
from coke, and then using this gas as a reducing agent for the iron.
(21.8)
Bond energy the energy required to break a given chemical bond.
(8.1)
Bond length the distance between the nuclei of the two atoms connected by a bond; the distance where the total energy of a diatomic
molecule is minimal. (8.1)
Bond order the difference between the number of bonding electrons
and the number of antibonding electrons, divided by two. It is an
index of bond strength. (9.2)
Bonding molecular orbital an orbital lower in energy than the atomic
orbitals of which it is composed. (9.2)
Bonding pair an electron pair found in the space between two atoms.
(8.9)
Borane a covalent hydride of boron. (19.5)
Boyle’s law the volume of a given sample of gas at constant temperature varies inversely with the pressure. (5.2)
Breeder reactor a nuclear reactor in which ﬁssionable fuel is produced
while the reactor runs. (18.6)
Brønsted–Lowry model a model proposing that an acid is a
proton donor, and a base is a proton acceptor. (14.1)
Buffered solution a solution that resists a change in its pH when
either hydroxide ions or protons are added. (15.2)
Buffering capacity the ability of a buffered solution to absorb protons or hydroxide ions without a signiﬁcant change in pH; determined by the magnitudes of [HA] and [A] in the solution. (15.3)
Calorimetry the science of measuring heat ﬂow. (6.2)
Capillary action the spontaneous rising of a liquid in a narrow tube.
(10.2)
Carbohydrate a polyhydroxyl ketone or polyhydroxyl aldehyde or a
polymer composed of these. (22.6)
Carbon steel an alloy of iron containing up to about 1.5% carbon.
(21.8)

Carboxyhemoglobin a stable complex of hemoglobin and carbon
monoxide that prevents normal oxygen uptake in the blood. (21.7)
Carboxyl group the OCOOH group in an organic acid. (14.2; 22.4)
Carboxylic acid an organic compound containing the carboxyl
group; an acid with the general formula RCOOH. (22.4)
Catalyst a substance that speeds up a reaction without being consumed. (12.8)
Cathode the electrode in a galvanic cell at which reduction occurs.
(17.1)
Cathode rays the “rays” emanating from the negative electrode (cathode) in a partially evacuated tube; a stream of electrons. (2.4)
Cathodic protection a method in which an active metal, such as magnesium, is connected to steel to protect it from corrosion. (17.6)
Cation a positive ion. (2.6)
Cell potential (electromotive force) the driving force in a galvanic
cell that pulls electrons from the reducing agent in one compartment to the oxidizing agent in the other. (17.1)
Ceramic a nonmetallic material made from clay and hardened by
firing at high temperature; it contains minute silicate crystals
suspended in a glassy cement. (10.5)
Chain reaction (nuclear) a self-sustaining ﬁssion process caused by
the production of neutrons that proceed to split other nuclei. (18.6)
Charles’s law the volume of a given sample of gas at constant pressure is directly proportional to the temperature in kelvins. (5.2)
Chelating ligand (chelate) a ligand having more than one atom with
a lone pair that can be used to bond to a metal ion. (21.3)
Chemical bond the force or, more accurately, the energy, that holds
two atoms together in a compound. (2.6)
Chemical change the change of substances into other substances
through a reorganization of the atoms; a chemical reaction. (1.9)
Chemical equation a representation of a chemical reaction showing the relative numbers of reactant and product molecules. (3.7)
Chemical equilibrium a dynamic reaction system in which the concentrations of all reactants and products remain constant as a function of time. (13)
Chemical formula the representation of a molecule in which the
symbols for the elements are used to indicate the types of atoms
present and subscripts are used to show the relative numbers of
atoms. (2.6)
Chemical kinetics the area of chemistry that concerns reaction rates.
(12)
Chemical stoichiometry the calculation of the quantities of material
consumed and produced in chemical reactions. (3)
Chirality the quality of having nonsuperimposable mirror images.
(21.4)
Chlor–alkali process the process for producing chlorine and sodium
hydroxide by electrolyzing brine in a mercury cell. (17.8)
Chromatography the general name for a series of methods for separating mixtures by employing a system with a mobile phase and a
stationary phase. (1.9)
Coagulation the destruction of a colloid by causing particles to aggregate and settle out. (11.8)
Codons organic bases in sets of three that form the genetic code. (22.6)
Colligative properties properties of a solution that depend only on
the number, and not on the identity, of the solute particles. (11.5)
Collision model a model based on the idea that molecules must
collide to react; used to account for the observed characteristics of
reaction rates. (12.7)

Glossary
Colloid (colloidal dispersion) a suspension of particles in a dispersing medium. (11.8)
Combustion reaction the vigorous and exothermic reaction that takes
place between certain substances, particularly organic compounds,
and oxygen. (22.1)
Common ion effect the shift in an equilibrium position caused by
the addition or presence of an ion involved in the equilibrium
reaction. (15.1)
Complete ionic equation an equation that shows all substances that
are strong electrolytes as ions. (4.6)
Complex ion a charged species consisting of a metal ion surrounded
by ligands. (15.8; 21.1)
Compound a substance with constant composition that can be
broken down into elements by chemical processes. (1.9)
Concentration cell a galvanic cell in which both compartments contain the same components, but at different concentrations. (17.4)
Condensation the process by which vapor molecules reform a
liquid. (10.8)
Condensation polymerization a type of polymerization in which the
formation of a small molecule, such as water, accompanies the extension of the polymer chain. (22.5)
Condensation reaction a reaction in which two molecules are joined,
accompanied by the elimination of a water molecule. (20.3)
Condensed states of matter liquids and solids. (10.1)
Conjugate acid the species formed when a proton is added to a base.
(14.1)
Conjugate acid–base pair two species related to each other by the
donating and accepting of a single proton. (14.1)
Conjugate base what remains of an acid molecule after a proton is
lost. (14.1)
Continuous spectrum a spectrum that exhibits all the wavelengths
of visible light. (7.3)
Control rods rods in a nuclear reactor composed of substances that absorb neutrons. These rods regulate the power level of the reactor. (18.6)
Coordinate covalent bond a metal–ligand bond resulting from the
interaction of a Lewis base (the ligand) and a Lewis acid (the metal
ion). (21.3)
Coordination compound a compound composed of a complex ion
and counter ions sufﬁcient to give no net charge. (21.3)
Coordination isomerism isomerism in a coordination compound in
which the composition of the coordination sphere of the metal ion
varies. (21.4)
Coordination number the number of bonds formed between the
metal ion and the ligands in a complex ion. (21.3)
Copolymer a polymer formed from the polymerization of more than
one type of monomer. (22.5)
Core electron an inner electron in an atom; one not in the outermost
(valence) principal quantum level. (7.11)
Corrosion the process by which metals are oxidized in the atmosphere. (17.6)
Q1Q2
Coulomb’s law E  2.31  1019 a
b, where E is the energy
r
of interaction between a pair of ions, expressed in joules; r is the
distance between the ion centers in nm; and Q1 and Q2 are the numerical ion charges. (8.1)
Counterions anions or cations that balance the charge on the complex ion in a coordination compound. (21.3)
Covalent bonding a type of bonding in which electrons are shared
by atoms. (2.6; 8.1)

A29

Critical mass the mass of ﬁssionable material required to produce a
self-sustaining chain reaction. (18.6)
Critical point the point on a phase diagram at which the temperature and pressure have their critical values; the end point of the
liquid–vapor line. (10.9)
Critical pressure the minimum pressure required to produce liquefaction of a substance at the critical temperature. (10.9)
Critical reaction (nuclear) a reaction in which exactly one neutron
from each ﬁssion event causes another ﬁssion event, thus sustaining the chain reaction. (18.6)
Critical temperature the temperature above which vapor cannot be
liqueﬁed no matter what pressure is applied. (10.9)
Crosslinking the existence of bonds between adjacent chains in a
polymer, thus adding strength to the material. (22.5)
Crystal ﬁeld model a model used to explain the magnetism and colors of coordination complexes through the splitting of the d orbital
energies. (21.6)
Crystalline solid a solid with a regular arrangement of its
components. (10.3)
Cubic closest packed (ccp) structure a solid modeled by the closest packing of spheres with an abcabc arrangement of layers; the
unit cell is face-centered cubic. (10.4)
Cyanidation a process in which crushed gold ore is treated with an
aqueous cyanide solution in the presence of air to dissolve the gold.
Pure gold is recovered by reduction of the ion to the metal. (21.8)
Cyclotron a type of particle accelerator in which an ion introduced
at the center is accelerated in an expanding spiral path by the use
of alternating electrical ﬁelds in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld.
(18.3)
Cytochromes a series of iron-containing species composed of heme
and a protein. Cytochromes are the principal electron-transfer molecules in the respiratory chain. (21.7)
Dalton’s law of partial pressures for a mixture of gases in a container, the total pressure exerted is the sum of the pressures that
each gas would exert if it were alone. (5.5)
Degenerate orbitals a group of orbitals with the same energy. (7.7)
Dehydrogenation reaction a reaction in which two hydrogen atoms
are removed from adjacent carbons of a saturated hydrocarbon, giving an unsaturated hydrocarbon. (22.1)
Denaturation the breaking down of the three-dimensional structure
of a protein resulting in the loss of its function. (22.6)
Denitriﬁcation the return of nitrogen from decomposed matter to the
atmosphere by bacteria that change nitrates to nitrogen gas. (20.2)
Density a property of matter representing the mass per unit volume. (1.8)
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) a huge nucleotide polymer having a
double-helical structure with complementary bases on the two
strands. Its major functions are protein synthesis and the storage
and transport of genetic information. (22.6)
Desalination the removal of dissolved salts from an aqueous
solution. (11.6)
Dialysis a phenomenon in which a semipermeable membrane
allows transfer of both solvent molecules and small solute molecules and ions. (11.6)
Diamagnetism a type of magnetism, associated with paired electrons,
that causes a substance to be repelled from the inducing magnetic
ﬁeld. (9.3)
Differential rate law an expression that gives the rate of a reaction
as a function of concentrations; often called the rate law. (12.2)

A30

Glossary

Diffraction the scattering of light from a regular array of points or
lines, producing constructive and destructive interference. (7.2)
Diffusion the mixing of gases. (5.7)
Dilution the process of adding solvent to lower the concentration of
solute in a solution. (4.3)
Dimer a molecule formed by the joining of two identical monomers.
(22.5)
Dipole–dipole attraction the attractive force resulting when polar
molecules line up so that the positive and negative ends are close
to each other. (10.1)
Dipole moment a property of a molecule whose charge distribution
can be represented by a center of positive charge and a center
of negative charge. (8.3)
Direct reduction furnace a furnace in which iron oxide is reduced
to iron metal using milder reaction conditions than in a blast
furnace. (21.8)
Disaccharide a sugar formed from two monosaccharides joined by a
glycoside linkage. (22.6)
Disproportionation reaction a reaction in which a given element is
both oxidized and reduced. (20.7)
Distillation a method for separating the components of a liquid mixture that depends on differences in the ease of vaporization of the
components. (1.9)
Disulﬁde linkage an SOS bond that stabilizes the tertiary structure
of many proteins. (22.6)
Double bond a bond in which two pairs of electrons are shared by
two atoms. (8.8)
Downs cell a cell used for electrolyzing molten sodium chloride.
(17.8)
Dry cell battery a common battery used in calculators, watches, radios, and tape players. (17.5)
Dual nature of light the statement that light exhibits both wave and
particulate properties. (7.2)
Effusion the passage of a gas through a tiny oriﬁce into an evacuated
chamber. (5.7)
Electrical conductivity the ability to conduct an electric current. (4.2)
Electrochemistry the study of the interchange of chemical and electrical energy. (17)
Electrolysis a process that involves forcing a current through a cell
to cause a nonspontaneous chemical reaction to occur. (17.7)
Electrolyte a material that dissolves in water to give a solution that
conducts an electric current. (4.2)
Electrolytic cell a cell that uses electrical energy to produce a chemical change that would otherwise not occur spontaneously. (17.7)
Electromagnetic radiation radiant energy that exhibits wavelike
behavior and travels through space at the speed of light in a
vacuum. (7.1)
Electron a negatively charged particle that moves around the
nucleus of an atom. (2.4)
Electron afﬁnity the energy change associated with the addition of
an electron to a gaseous atom. (7.12)
Electron capture a process in which one of the inner-orbital
electrons in an atom is captured by the nucleus. (18.1)
Electron spin quantum number a quantum number representing one
of the two possible values for the electron spin; either 12 or 12.
(7.8)
Electronegativity the tendency of an atom in a molecule to attract
shared electrons to itself. (8.2)

Element a substance that cannot be decomposed into simpler
substances by chemical or physical means. (1.9)
Elementary step a reaction whose rate law can be written from its
molecularity. (12.6)
E  mc2 Einstein’s equation proposing that energy has mass; E is
energy, m is mass, and c is the speed of light. (7.2)
Empirical formula the simplest whole number ratio of atoms in a
compound. (3.6)
Enantiomers isomers that are nonsuperimposable mirror images of
each other. (21.4)
Endpoint the point in a titration at which the indicator changes color.
(4.8)
Endothermic refers to a reaction where energy (as heat) ﬂows into
the system. (6.1)
Energy the capacity to do work or to cause heat ﬂow. (6.1)
Enthalpy a property of a system equal to E  PV, where E is the
internal energy of the system, P is the pressure of the system, and
V is the volume of the system. At constant pressure the change in
enthalpy equals the energy ﬂow as heat. (6.2)
Enthalpy (heat) of fusion the enthalpy change that occurs to melt a
solid at its melting point. (10.8)
Entropy a thermodynamic function that measures randomness or disorder. (16.1)
Enzyme a large molecule, usually a protein, that catalyzes biological
reactions. (12.8)
Equilibrium constant the value obtained when equilibrium concentrations of the chemical species are substituted in the equilibrium
expression. (13.2)
Equilibrium expression the expression (from the law of mass
action) obtained by multiplying the product concentrations and dividing by the multiplied reactant concentrations, with each
concentration raised to a power represented by the coefﬁcient in the
balanced equation. (13.2)
Equilibrium point (thermodynamic deﬁnition) the position where
the free energy of a reaction system has its lowest possible value. (16.8)
Equilibrium position a particular set of equilibrium concentrations.
(13.2)
Equivalence point (stoichiometric point) the point in a titration
when enough titrant has been added to react exactly with the substance in solution being titrated. (4.9; 15.4)
Ester an organic compound produced by the reaction between a carboxylic acid and an alcohol. (22.4)
Exothermic refers to a reaction where energy (as heat) ﬂows out of
the system. (6.1)
Exponential notation expresses a number as N  10 M, a convenient
method for representing a very large or very small number and for
easily indicating the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures. (1.5)
Faraday a constant representing the charge on one mole of electrons;
96,485 coulombs. (17.3)
Filtration a method for separating the components of a mixture containing a solid and a liquid. (1.9)
First law of thermodynamics the energy of the universe is constant;
same as the law of conservation of energy. (6.1)
Fission the process of using a neutron to split a heavy nucleus into
two nuclei with smaller mass numbers. (18.6)
Flotation process a method of separating the mineral particles in an
ore from the gangue that depends on the greater wettability of the
mineral pieces. (21.8)

Glossary
Formal charge the charge assigned to an atom in a molecule or polyatomic ion derived from a speciﬁc set of rules. (8.12)
Formation constant (stability constant) the equilibrium constant for
each step of the formation of a complex ion by the addition of an
individual ligand to a metal ion or complex ion in aqueous solution. (15.8)
Formula equation an equation representing a reaction in solution
showing the reactants and products in undissociated form, whether
they are strong or weak electrolytes. (4.6)
Fossil fuel coal, petroleum, or natural gas; consists of carbon-based
molecules derived from decomposition of once-living organisms.
(6.5)
Frasch process the recovery of sulfur from underground deposits by
melting it with hot water and forcing it to the surface by air pressure. (20.6)
Free energy a thermodynamic function equal to the enthalpy (H)
minus the product of the entropy (S) and the Kelvin temperature
(T ); G  H  TS. Under certain conditions the change in free energy for a process is equal to the maximum useful work. (16.4)
Free radical a species with an unpaired electron. (22.5)
Frequency the number of waves (cycles) per second that pass a given
point in space. (7.1)
Fuel cell a galvanic cell for which the reactants are continuously supplied. (17.5)
Functional group an atom or group of atoms in hydrocarbon
derivatives that contains elements in addition to carbon and
hydrogen. (22.4)
Fusion the process of combining two light nuclei to form a heavier,
more stable nucleus. (18.6)
Galvanic cell a device in which chemical energy from a spontaneous
redox reaction is changed to electrical energy that can be used to
do work. (17.1)
Galvanizing a process in which steel is coated with zinc to prevent
corrosion. (17.6)
Gamma (␥) ray a high-energy photon. (18.1)
Gangue the impurities (such as clay or sand) in an ore. (21.8)
Geiger–Müller counter (Geiger counter) an instrument that measures the rate of radioactive decay based on the ions and electrons
produced as a radioactive particle passes through a gas-ﬁlled chamber. (18.4)
Gene a given segment of the DNA molecule that contains the code
for a speciﬁc protein. (22.6)
Geometrical (cis–trans) isomerism isomerism in which atoms or
groups of atoms can assume different positions around a rigid ring
or bond. (21.4; 22.2)
Glass an amorphous solid obtained when silica is mixed with other
compounds, heated above its melting point, and then cooled rapidly.
(10.5)
Glass electrode an electrode for measuring pH from the potential difference that develops when it is dipped into an aqueous solution
containing H ions. (17.4)
Glycoside linkage a COOOC bond formed between the rings of two
cyclic monosaccharides by the elimination of water. (22.6)
Graham’s law of effusion the rate of effusion of a gas is inversely
proportional to the square root of the mass of its particles. (5.7)
Greenhouse effect a warming effect exerted by the earth’s atmosphere (particularly CO2 and H2O) due to thermal energy retained
by absorption of infrared radiation. (6.5)

A31

Ground state the lowest possible energy state of an atom or molecule. (7.4)
Group (of the periodic table) a vertical column of elements
having the same valence electron conﬁguration and showing
similar properties. (2.7)
Haber process the manufacture of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen, carried out at high pressure and high temperature with the
aid of a catalyst. (3.10; 20.2)
Half-life (of a radioactive sample) the time required for the number
of nuclides in a radioactive sample to reach half of the original
value. (18.2)
Half-life (of a reactant) the time required for a reactant to reach half
of its original concentration. (12.4)
Half-reactions the two parts of an oxidation–reduction reaction, one
representing oxidation, the other reduction. (4.10; 17.1)
Halogen a Group 7A element. (2.7; 20.7)
Halogenation the addition of halogen atoms to unsaturated hydrocarbons. (22.2)
Hard water water from natural sources that contains relatively large
concentrations of calcium and magnesium ions. (19.4)
Heat energy transferred between two objects due to a temperature
difference between them. (6.1)
Heat capacity the amount of energy required to raise the temperature of an object by one degree Celsius. (6.2)
Heat of fusion the enthalpy change that occurs to melt a solid at its
melting point. (10.8)
Heat of hydration the enthalpy change associated with placing
gaseous molecules or ions in water; the sum of the energy needed
to expand the solvent and the energy released from the
solvent–solute interactions. (11.2)
Heat of solution the enthalpy change associated with dissolving a
solute in a solvent; the sum of the energies needed to expand both
solvent and solute in a solution and the energy released from the
solvent–solute interactions. (11.2)
Heat of vaporization the energy required to vaporize one mole of a
liquid at a pressure of one atmosphere. (10.8)
Heating curve a plot of temperature versus time for a substance where
energy is added at a constant rate. (10.8)
Heisenberg uncertainty principle a principle stating that there is a
fundamental limitation to how precisely both the position and momentum of a particle can be known at a given time. (7.5)
Heme an iron complex. (21.7)
Hemoglobin a biomolecule composed of four myoglobin-like units
(proteins plus heme) that can bind and transport four oxygen molecules in the blood. (21.7)
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation an equation giving the relationship between the pH of an acid–base system and the concentrations
of base and acid: pH  pKa  log a

3base 4

b. (15.2)
3acid4
Henry’s law the amount of a gas dissolved in a solution is directly
proportional to the pressure of the gas above the solution. (11.3)
Hess’s law in going from a particular set of reactants to a particular
set of products, the enthalpy change is the same whether the reaction takes place in one step or in a series of steps; in summary, enthalpy is a state function. (6.3)
Heterogeneous equilibrium an equilibrium involving reactants
and/or products in more than one phase. (13.4)

A32

Glossary

Hexagonal closest packed (hcp) structure a structure composed of
closest packed spheres with an ababab arrangement of layers; the
unit cell is hexagonal. (10.4)
Homogeneous equilibrium an equilibrium system where all reactants and products are in the same phase. (13.4)
Homopolymer a polymer formed from the polymerization of only
one type of monomer. (22.5)
Hund’s rule the lowest energy conﬁguration for an atom is the one
having the maximum number of unpaired electrons allowed by the
Pauli exclusion principle in a particular set of degenerate orbitals,
with all unpaired electrons having parallel spins. (7.11)
Hybrid orbitals a set of atomic orbitals adopted by an atom in a molecule different from those of the atom in the free state. (9.1)
Hybridization a mixing of the native orbitals on a given atom to form
special atomic orbitals for bonding. (9.1)
Hydration the interaction between solute particles and water molecules. (4.1)
Hydride a binary compound containing hydrogen. The hydride ion,
H, exists in ionic hydrides. The three classes of hydrides are covalent, interstitial, and ionic. (19.3)
Hydrocarbon a compound composed of carbon and hydrogen. (22.1)
Hydrocarbon derivative an organic molecule that contains one or
more elements in addition to carbon and hydrogen. (22.4)
Hydrogen bonding unusually strong dipole–dipole attractions that
occur among molecules in which hydrogen is bonded to a highly
electronegative atom. (10.1)
Hydrogenation reaction a reaction in which hydrogen is added, with
a catalyst present, to a carbon–carbon multiple bond. (22.2)
Hydrohalic acid an aqueous solution of a hydrogen halide. (20.7)
Hydrometallurgy a process for extracting metals from ores by use
of aqueous chemical solutions. Two steps are involved: selective
leaching and selective precipitation. (21.8)
Hydronium ion the H3O ion; a hydrated proton. (14.1)
Hypothesis one or more assumptions put forth to explain the
observed behavior of nature. (1.2)
Ideal gas law an equation of state for a gas, where the state of the
gas is its condition at a given time; expressed by PV  nRT,
where P  pressure, V  volume, n  moles of the gas, R  the
universal gas constant, and T  absolute temperature. This equation expresses behavior approached by real gases at high T and
low P. (5.3)
Ideal solution a solution whose vapor pressure is directly proportional to the mole fraction of solvent present. (11.4)
Indicator a chemical that changes color and is used to mark the end
point of a titration. (4.8; 15.5)
Integrated rate law an expression that shows the concentration of a
reactant as a function of time. (12.2)
Interhalogen compound a compound formed by the reaction of one
halogen with another. (20.7)
Intermediate a species that is neither a reactant nor a product but
that is formed and consumed in the reaction sequence. (12.6)
Intermolecular forces relatively weak interactions that occur between
molecules. (10.1)
Internal energy a property of a system that can be changed by a ﬂow
of work, heat or both; E  q  w, where E is the change in the
internal energy of the system, q is heat, and w is work. (6.1)
Ion an atom or a group of atoms that has a net positive or negative
charge. (2.6)

Ion exchange (water softening) the process in which an ionexchange resin removes unwanted ions (for example, Ca2 and
Mg2) and replaces them with Na ions, which do not interfere with
soap and detergent action. (19.4)
Ion pairing a phenomenon occurring in solution when oppositely
charged ions aggregate and behave as a single particle. (11.7)
Ion-product (dissociation) constant (Kw ) the equilibrium constant
for the auto-ionization of water; Kw  [H][OH]. At 25°C, Kw
equals 1.0  1014. (14.2)
Ion-selective electrode an electrode sensitive to the concentration of
a particular ion in solution. (17.4)
Ionic bonding the electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged
ions. (2.6; 8.1)
Ionic compound (binary) a compound that results when a metal reacts with a nonmetal to form a cation and an anion. (8.1)
Ionic solid (salt) a solid containing cations and anions that dissolves
in water to give a solution containing the separated ions which are
mobile and thus free to conduct electrical current. (2.6; 10.3)
Irreversible process any real process. When a system undergoes the
changes State 1 n State 2 n State 1 by any real pathway, the universe is different than before the cyclic process took place in the
system. (16.9)
Isoelectronic ions ions containing the same number of electrons. (8.4)
Isomers species with the same formula but different properties. (21.4)
Isotactic chain a polymer chain in which the substituent groups such
as CH3 are all arranged on the same side of the chain. (22.5)
Isotonic solutions solutions having identical osmotic pressures.
(11.6)
Isotopes atoms of the same element (the same number of protons)
with different numbers of neutrons. They have identical atomic
numbers but different mass numbers. (2.5; 18)
Ketone an organic compound containing the carbonyl group bonded

to two carbon atoms. (22.4)
Kinetic energy (12mv2) energy due to the motion of an object; dependent on the mass of the object and the square of its velocity. (6.1)
Kinetic molecular theory (KMT) a model that assumes that an ideal
gas is composed of tiny particles (molecules) in constant motion.
(5.6)
Lanthanide contraction the decrease in the atomic radii of the lanthanide series elements, going from left to right in the periodic table.
(21.1)
Lanthanide series a group of 14 elements following lanthanum in
the periodic table, in which the 4f orbitals are being ﬁlled. (7.11;
19.1; 21.1)
Lattice a three-dimensional system of points designating the positions
of the centers of the components of a solid (atoms, ions, or molecules). (10.3)
Lattice energy the energy change occurring when separated gaseous
ions are packed together to form an ionic solid. (8.5)
Law of conservation of energy energy can be converted from one
form to another but can be neither created nor destroyed. (6.1)
Law of conservation of mass mass is neither created nor destroyed.
(1.2; 2.2)

Glossary
Law of deﬁnite proportion a given compound always contains exactly the same proportion of elements by mass. (2.2)
Law of mass action a general description of the equilibrium condition; it deﬁnes the equilibrium constant expression. (13.2)
Law of multiple proportions a law stating that when two elements
form a series of compounds, the ratios of the masses of the second
element that combine with one gram of the ﬁrst element can always
be reduced to small whole numbers. (2.2)
Leaching the extraction of metals from ores using aqueous chemical
solutions. (21.8)
Lead storage battery a battery (used in cars) in which the anode is
lead, the cathode is lead coated with lead dioxide, and the electrolyte is a sulfuric acid solution. (17.5)
Le Châtelier’s principle if a change is imposed on a system at equilibrium, the position of the equilibrium will shift in a direction that
tends to reduce the effect of that change. (13.7)
Lewis acid an electron-pair acceptor. (14.11)
Lewis base an electron-pair donor. (14.11)
Lewis structure a diagram of a molecule showing how the valence
electrons are arranged among the atoms in the molecule. (8.10)
Ligand a neutral molecule or ion having a lone pair of electrons that
can be used to form a bond to a metal ion; a Lewis base. (21.3)
Lime–soda process a water-softening method in which lime and soda
ash are added to water to remove calcium and magnesium ions by
precipitation. (14.6)
Limiting reactant (limiting reagent) the reactant that is completely
consumed when a reaction is run to completion. (3.10)
Line spectrum a spectrum showing only certain discrete wavelengths. (7.3)
Linear accelerator a type of particle accelerator in which a changing electrical ﬁeld is used to accelerate a positive ion along a linear path. (18.3)
Linkage isomerism isomerism involving a complex ion where the
ligands are all the same but the point of attachment of at least one
of the ligands differs. (21.4)
Liquefaction the transformation of a gas into a liquid. (19.1)
Localized electron (LE) model a model which assumes that a molecule is composed of atoms that are bound together by sharing pairs
of electrons using the atomic orbitals of the bound atoms. (8.9)
London dispersion forces the forces, existing among noble gas atoms
and nonpolar molecules, that involve an accidental dipole that induces a momentary dipole in a neighbor. (10.1)
Lone pair an electron pair that is localized on a given atom; an electron pair not involved in bonding. (8.9)
Magnetic quantum number mᐉ, the quantum number relating to the
orientation of an orbital in space relative to the other orbitals with
the same ᐉ quantum number. It can have integral values between
ᐉ and ᐉ, including zero. (7.6)
Main-group (representative) elements elements in the groups labeled
1A, 2A, 3A, 4A, 5A, 6A, 7A, and 8A in the periodic table. The group
number gives the sum of the valence s and p electrons. (7.11; 18.1)
Major species the components present in relatively large amounts in
a solution. (14.3)
Manometer a device for measuring the pressure of a gas in a container. (5.1)
Mass the quantity of matter in an object. (1.3)
Mass defect the change in mass occurring when a nucleus is formed
from its component nucleons. (18.5)

A33

Mass number the total number of protons and neutrons in the atomic
nucleus of an atom. (2.5; 18)
Mass percent the percent by mass of a component of a mixture (11.1)
or of a given element in a compound. (3.5)
Mass spectrometer an instrument used to determine the relative
masses of atoms by the deﬂection of their ions on a magnetic ﬁeld.
(3.2)
Matter the material of the universe. (1.9)
Messenger RNA (mRNA) a special RNA molecule built in the cell
nucleus that migrates into the cytoplasm and participates in protein
synthesis. (22.6)
Metal an element that gives up electrons relatively easily and is lustrous, malleable, and a good conductor of heat and electricity. (2.7)
Metalloids (semimetals) elements along the division line in the periodic table between metals and nonmetals. These elements exhibit
both metallic and nonmetallic properties. (7.13; 19.1)
Metallurgy the process of separating a metal from its ore and preparing it for use. (19.1; 21.8)
Millimeters of mercury (mmHg) a unit of pressure, also called a torr,
760 mm Hg  760 torr  101,325 Pa  1 standard atmosphere. (5.1)
Mineral a relatively pure compound as found in nature. (21.8)
Model (theory) a set of assumptions put forth to explain the observed
behavior of matter. The models of chemistry usually involve
assumptions about the behavior of individual atoms or molecules.
(1.2)
Moderator a substance used in a nuclear reactor to slow down the
neutrons. (18.6)
Molal boiling-point elevation constant a constant characteristic of
a particular solvent that gives the change in boiling point as a function of solution molality; used in molecular weight determinations.
(11.5)
Molal freezing-point depression constant a constant characteristic
of a particular solvent that gives the change in freezing point as a
function of the solution molality; used in molecular weight determinations (11.5)
Molality the number of moles of solute per kilogram of solvent in a
solution. (11.1)
Molar heat capacity the energy required to raise the temperature of
one mole of a substance by one degree Celsius. (6.2)
Molar mass the mass in grams of one mole of molecules or formula
units of a substance; also called molecular weight. (3.4)
Molar volume the volume of one mole of an ideal gas; equal to 22.42
liters at STP. (5.4)
Molarity moles of solute per volume of solution in liters. (4.3; 11.1)
Mole (mol) the number equal to the number of carbon atoms in exactly 12 grams of pure 12C: Avogadro’s number. One mole represents 6.022  1023 units. (3.3)
Mole fraction the ratio of the number of moles of a given component
in a mixture to the total number of moles in the mixture. (5.5; 11.1)
Mole ratio (stoichiometry) the ratio of moles of one substance to
moles of another substance in a balanced chemical equation. (3.9)
Molecular formula the exact formula of a molecule, giving the types
of atoms and the number of each type. (3.6)
Molecular orbital (MO) model a model that regards a molecule as
a collection of nuclei and electrons, where the electrons are assumed
to occupy orbitals much as they do in atoms, but having the orbitals
extend over the entire molecule. In this model the electrons are assumed to be delocalized rather than always located between a given
pair of atoms. (9.2; 10.4)

A34

Glossary

Molecular orientations (kinetics) orientations of molecules during collisions, some of which can lead to reaction while others cannot. (12.7)
Molecular solid a solid composed of neutral molecules at the lattice
points. (10.3)
Molecular structure the three-dimensional arrangement of atoms in
a molecule. (8.13)
Molecularity the number of species that must collide to produce the
reaction represented by an elementary step in a reaction mechanism.
(12.6)
Molecule a bonded collection of two or more atoms of the same or
different elements. (2.6)
Monodentate (unidentate) ligand a ligand that can form one bond
to a metal ion. (21.3)
Monoprotic acid an acid with one acidic proton. (14.2)
Monosaccharide (simple sugar) a polyhydroxy ketone or aldehyde
containing from three to nine carbon atoms. (22.6)
Myoglobin an oxygen-storing biomolecule consisting of a heme complex and a proton. (21.7)
Natural law a statement that expresses generally observed behavior.
(1.2)
Nernst equation an equation relating the potential of an electrochemical cell to the concentrations of the cell components:
e  e° 

0.0591
log1Q2 at 25°C
n

(17.4)

Net ionic equation an equation for a reaction in solution, where
strong electrolytes are written as ions, showing only those components that are directly involved in the chemical change. (4.6)
Network solid an atomic solid containing strong directional covalent
bonds. (10.5)
Neutralization reaction an acid–base reaction. (4.8)
Neutron a particle in the atomic nucleus with mass virtually equal to
the proton’s but with no charge. (2.5; 18)
Nitrogen cycle the conversion of N2 to nitrogen-containing compounds, followed by the return of nitrogen gas to the atmosphere
by natural decay processes. (20.2)
Nitrogen ﬁxation the process of transforming N2 to nitrogencontaining compounds useful to plants. (20.2)
Nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria bacteria in the root nodules of plants that
can convert atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia and other nitrogencontaining compounds useful to plants. (20.2)
Noble gas a Group 8A element. (2.7; 20.8)
Node an area of an orbital having zero electron probability. (7.7)
Nonelectrolyte a substance that, when dissolved in water, gives a nonconducting solution. (4.2)
Nonmetal an element not exhibiting metallic characteristics. Chemically, a typical nonmetal accepts electrons from a metal. (2.7)
Normal boiling point the temperature at which the vapor pressure of
a liquid is exactly one atmosphere. (10.8)
Normal melting point the temperature at which the solid and
liquid states have the same vapor pressure under conditions where
the total pressure on the system is one atmosphere. (10.8)
Normality the number of equivalents of a substance dissolved in a
liter of solution. (11.1)
Nuclear atom an atom having a dense center of positive charge (the
nucleus) with electrons moving around the outside. (2.4)
Nuclear transformation the change of one element into another.
(18.3)

Nucleon a particle in an atomic nucleus, either a neutron or a
proton. (18)
Nucleotide a monomer of the nucleic acids composed of a ﬁve-carbon
sugar, a nitrogen-containing base, and phosphoric acid. (22.6)
Nucleus the small, dense center of positive charge in an atom. (2.4)
Nuclide the general term applied to each unique atom; represented
A
by ZX, where X is the symbol for a particular element. (18)
Octet rule the observation that atoms of nonmetals tend to form the
most stable molecules when they are surrounded by eight electrons
(to ﬁll their valence orbitals). (8.10)
Open hearth process a process for producing steel by oxidizing and
removing the impurities in molten iron using external heat and a
blast of air or oxygen. (21.8)
Optical isomerism isomerism in which the isomers have opposite effects on plane-polarized light. (21.4)
Orbital a speciﬁc wave function for an electron in an atom. The
square of this function gives the probability distribution for the electron. (7.5)
d-Orbital splitting a splitting of the d orbitals of the metal ion in a
complex such that the orbitals pointing at the ligands have higher
energies than those pointing between the ligands. (21.6)
Order (of reactant) the positive or negative exponent, determined
by experiment, of the reactant concentration in a rate law. (12.2)
Organic acid an acid with a carbon-atom backbone; often contains
the carboxyl group. (14.2)
Organic chemistry the study of carbon-containing compounds (typically chains of carbon atoms) and their properties. (22)
Osmosis the ﬂow of solvent into a solution through a semipermeable
membrane. (11.6)
Osmotic pressure (␲) the pressure that must be applied to a solution
to stop osmosis; ␲  MRT. (11.6)
Ostwald process a commercial process for producing nitric acid by
the oxidation of ammonia. (20.2)
Oxidation an increase in oxidation state (a loss of electrons). (4.9;
17.1)
Oxidation–reduction (redox) reaction a reaction in which one or
more electrons are transferred. (4.9; 17.1)
Oxidation states a concept that provides a way to keep track of electrons in oxidation–reduction reactions according to certain rules.
(4.9; 21.3)
Oxidizing agent (electron acceptor) a reactant that accepts electrons
from another reactant. (4.9; 17.1)
Oxyacid an acid in which the acidic proton is attached to an oxygen
atom. (14.2)
Ozone O3, the form of elemental oxygen in addition to the much more
common O2. (20.5)
Paramagnetism a type of induced magnetism, associated with
unpaired electrons, that causes a substance to be attracted into the
inducing magnetic ﬁeld. (9.3)
Partial pressures the independent pressures exerted by different
gases in a mixture. (5.5)
Particle accelerator a device used to accelerate nuclear particles to
very high speeds. (18.3)
Pascal the SI unit of pressure; equal to newtons per meter squared.
(5.1)
Pauli exclusion principle in a given atom no two electrons can have
the same set of four quantum numbers. (7.8)

Glossary
Peptide linkage the bond resulting from the condensation reaction
between amino acids; represented by:
(22.6)
Percent dissociation the ratio of the amount of a substance that is
dissociated at equilibrium to the initial concentration of the substance in a solution, multiplied by 100. (14.5)
Percent yield the actual yield of a product as a percentage of the theoretical yield. (3.10)
Periodic table a chart showing all the elements arranged in columns
with similar chemical properties. (2.7)
pH curve (titration curve) a plot showing the pH of a solution being analyzed as a function of the amount of titrant added. (15.4)
pH scale a log scale based on 10 and equal to log[H]; a convenient way to represent solution acidity. (14.3)
Phase diagram a convenient way of representing the phases of a substance in a closed system as a function of temperature and pressure.
(10.9)
Phenyl group the benzene molecule minus one hydrogen atom. (22.3)
Photochemical smog air pollution produced by the action of light on
oxygen, nitrogen oxides, and unburned fuel from auto exhaust to
form ozone and other pollutants. (5.10)
Photon a quantum of electromagnetic radiation. (7.2)
Physical change a change in the form of a substance, but not in its
chemical composition; chemical bonds are not broken in a physical change. (1.9)
Pi (␲) bond a covalent bond in which parallel p orbitals share an
electron pair occupying the space above and below the line joining
the atoms. (9.1)
Planck’s constant the constant relating the change in energy for a
system to the frequency of the electromagnetic radiation absorbed
or emitted; equal to 6.626  1034 J s. (7.2)
Polar covalent bond a covalent bond in which the electrons are not
shared equally because one atom attracts them more strongly than
the other. (8.1)
Polar molecule a molecule that has a permanent dipole moment. (4.1)
Polyatomic ion an ion containing a number of atoms. (2.6)
Polyelectronic atom an atom with more than one electron. (7.9)
Polymer a large, usually chainlike molecule built from many small
molecules (monomers). (22.5)
Polymerization a process in which many small molecules
(monomers) are joined together to form a large molecule. (22.2)
Polypeptide a polymer formed from amino acids joined together by
peptide linkages. (22.6)
Polyprotic acid an acid with more than one acidic proton. It dissociates in a stepwise manner, one proton at a time. (14.7)
Porous disk a disk in a tube connecting two different solutions in a
galvanic cell that allows ion ﬂow without extensive mixing of the
solutions. (17.1)
Porphyrin a planar ligand with a central ring structure and various
substituent groups at the edges of the ring. (21.7)
Positional probability a type of probability that depends on the number of arrangements in space that yield a particular state. (16.1)
Positron production a mode of nuclear decay in which a particle is
formed having the same mass as an electron but opposite charge.
The net effect is to change a proton to a neutron. (18.1)
Potential energy energy due to position or composition. (6.1)

A35

Precipitation reaction a reaction in which an insoluble substance
forms and separates from the solution. (4.5)
Precision the degree of agreement among several measurements of
the same quantity; the reproducibility of a measurement. (1.4)
Primary structure (of a protein) the order (sequence) of amino acids
in the protein chain. (22.6)
Principal quantum number (n) the quantum number relating to the
size and energy of an orbital; it can have any positive integer value.
(7.6)
Probability distribution the square of the wave function indicating the
probability of ﬁnding an electron at a particular point in space. (7.5)
Product a substance resulting from a chemical reaction. It is shown
to the right of the arrow in a chemical equation. (3.7)
Protein a natural high-molecular-weight polymer formed by condensation reactions between amino acids. (22.6)
Proton a positively charged particle in an atomic nucleus. (2.5; 18)
Pure substance a substance with constant composition. (1.9)
Pyrometallurgy recovery of a metal from its ore by treatment at high
temperatures. (21.8)
Quantization the concept that energy can occur only in discrete units
called quanta. (7.2)
Rad a unit of radiation dosage corresponding to 102 J of energy deposited per kilogram of tissue (from radiation absorbed dose). (18.7)
Radioactive decay (radioactivity) the spontaneous decomposition of
a nucleus to form a different nucleus. (2.4; 18.1)
Radiocarbon dating (carbon-14 dating) a method for dating ancient
wood or cloth based on the rate of radioactive decay of the nuclide
14
6C. (18.4)
Radiotracer a radioactive nuclide, introduced into an organism for
diagnostic purposes, whose pathway can be traced by monitoring
its radioactivity. (18.4)
Random error an error that has an equal probability of being high
or low. (1.4)
Raoult’s law the vapor pressure of a solution is directly proportional
to the mole fraction of solvent present. (11.4)
Rate constant the proportionality constant in the relationship between
reaction rate and reactant concentrations. (12.2)
Rate of decay the change in the number of radioactive nuclides in a
sample per unit time. (18.2)
Rate-determining step the slowest step in a reaction mechanism, the
one determining the overall rate. (12.6)
Rate law (differential rate law) an expression that shows how the
rate of reaction depends on the concentration of reactants. (12.2)
Reactant a starting substance in a chemical reaction. It appears to the
left of the arrow in a chemical equation. (3.7)
Reaction mechanism the series of elementary steps involved in a
chemical reaction. (12.6)
Reaction quotient, Q a quotient obtained by applying the law of mass
action to initial concentrations rather than to equilibrium concentrations. (13.5)
Reaction rate the change in concentration of a reactant or product
per unit time. (12.1)
Reactor core the part of a nuclear reactor where the ﬁssion reaction
takes place. (18.6)
Reducing agent (electron donor) a reactant that donates electrons to
another substance to reduce the oxidation state of one of its atoms.
(4.9; 17.1)

A36

Glossary

Reduction a decrease in oxidation state (a gain of electrons).
(4.9; 17.1)
Rem a unit of radiation dosage that accounts for both the energy of
the dose and its effectiveness in causing biological damage (from
roentgen equivalent for man). (18.7)
Resonance a condition occurring when more than one valid Lewis
structure can be written for a particular molecule. The actual electronic structure is not represented by any one of the Lewis structures but by the average of all of them. (8.12)
Reverse osmosis the process occurring when the external pressure on
a solution causes a net ﬂow of solvent through a semipermeable
membrane from the solution to the solvent. (11.6)
Reversible process a cyclic process carried out by a hypothetical
pathway, which leaves the universe exactly the same as it was before the process. No real process is reversible. (16.9)
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) a nucleotide polymer that transmits the genetic information stored in DNA to the ribosomes for protein synthesis. (22.6)
Roasting a process of converting sulﬁde minerals to oxides by heating in air at temperatures below their melting points. (21.8)
Root mean square velocity the square root of the average of the
squares of the individual velocities of gas particles. (5.6)
Salt an ionic compound. (14.8)
Salt bridge a U-tube containing an electrolyte that connects the two
compartments of a galvanic cell, allowing ion ﬂow without extensive mixing of the different solutions. (17.1)
Scientiﬁc method the process of studying natural phenomena,
involving observations, forming laws and theories, and testing of
theories by experimentation. (1.2)
Scintillation counter an instrument that measures radioactive
decay by sensing the ﬂashes of light produced in a substance by the
radiation. (18.4)
Second law of thermodynamics in any spontaneous process, there
is always an increase in the entropy of the universe. (16.2)
Secondary structure (of a protein) the three-dimensional structure
of the protein chain (for example, ␣-helix, random coil, or pleated
sheet). (22.6)
Selective precipitation a method of separating metal ions from an
aqueous mixture by using a reagent whose anion forms a precipitate with only one or a few of the ions in the mixture. (4.7; 15.7)
Semiconductor a substance conducting only a slight electrical current at room temperature, but showing increased conductivity at
higher temperatures. (10.5)
Semipermeable membrane a membrane that allows solvent but not
solute molecules to pass through. (11.6)
SI system International System of units based on the metric system
and units derived from the metric system. (1.3)
Side chain (of amino acid) the hydrocarbon group on an amino acid
represented by H, CH3, or a more complex substituent. (22.6)
Sigma (␴) bond a covalent bond in which the electron pair is shared
in an area centered on a line running between the atoms. (9.1)
Signiﬁcant ﬁgures the certain digits and the ﬁrst uncertain digit of a
measurement. (1.4)
Silica the fundamental silicon–oxygen compound, which has the empirical formula SiO2, and forms the basis of quartz and certain types
of sand. (10.5)
Silicates salts that contain metal cations and polyatomic silicon–
oxygen anions that are usually polymeric. (10.5)

Single bond a bond in which one pair of electrons is shared by two
atoms. (8.8)
Smelting a metallurgical process that involves reducing metal ions to
the free metal. (21.8)
Solubility the amount of a substance that dissolves in a given volume
of solvent at a given temperature. (4.2)
Solubility product constant the constant for the equilibrium expression representing the dissolving of an ionic solid in water. (15.6)
Solute a substance dissolved in a liquid to form a solution. (4.2; 11.1)
Solution a homogeneous mixture. (1.9)
Solvent the dissolving medium in a solution. (4.2)
Somatic damage radioactive damage to an organism resulting in its
sickness or death. (18.7)
Space-ﬁlling model a model of a molecule showing the relative sizes
of the atoms and their relative orientations. (2.6)
Speciﬁc heat capacity the energy required to raise the temperature
of one gram of a substance by one degree Celsius. (6.2)
Spectator ions ions present in solution that do not participate
directly in a reaction. (4.6)
Spectrochemical series a listing of ligands in order based on their
ability to produce d-orbital splitting. (21.6)
Spontaneous ﬁssion the spontaneous splitting of a heavy nuclide into
two lighter nuclides. (18.1)
Spontaneous process a process that occurs without outside
intervention. (16.1)
Standard atmosphere a unit of pressure equal to 760 mm Hg. (5.1)
Standard enthalpy of formation the enthalpy change that accompanies the formation of one mole of a compound at 25°C from its
elements, with all substances in their standard states at that temperature. (6.4)
Standard free energy change the change in free energy that will
occur for one unit of reaction if the reactants in their standard
states are converted to products in their standard states. (16.6)
Standard free energy of formation the change in free energy that
accompanies the formation of one mole of a substance from its constituent elements with all reactants and products in their
standard states. (16.6)
Standard hydrogen electrode a platinum conductor in contact with
1 M H ions and bathed by hydrogen gas at one atmosphere. (17.2)
Standard reduction potential the potential of a half-reaction under
standard state conditions, as measured against the potential of the
standard hydrogen electrode. (17.2)
Standard solution a solution whose concentration is accurately
known. (4.3)
Standard state a reference state for a speciﬁc substance deﬁned according to a set of conventional deﬁnitions. (6.4)
Standard temperature and pressure (STP) the condition 0°C and
1 atmosphere of pressure. (5.4)
Standing wave a stationary wave as on a string of a musical
instrument; in the wave mechanical model, the electron in the hydrogen atom is considered to be a standing wave. (7.5)
State function (property) a property that is independent of the pathway. (6.1)
States of matter the three different forms in which matter can
exist; solid, liquid, and gas. (1.9)
Stereoisomerism isomerism in which all the bonds in the isomers are
the same but the spatial arrangements of the atoms are different. (21.4)
Steric factor the factor (always less than 1) that reﬂects the fraction of
collisions with orientations that can produce a chemical reaction. (12.7)

Glossary
Stoichiometric quantities quantities of reactants mixed in exactly the
correct amounts so that all are used up at the same time. (3.10)
Strong acid an acid that completely dissociates to produce an H ion
and the conjugate base. (4.2; 14.2)
Strong base a metal hydroxide salt that completely dissociates into
its ions in water. (4.2; 14.6)
Strong electrolyte a material that, when dissolved in water, gives a
solution that conducts an electric current very efﬁciently. (4.2)
Structural formula the representation of a molecule in which
the relative positions of the atoms are shown and the bonds are indicated by lines. (2.6)
Structural isomerism isomerism in which the isomers contain the
same atoms but one or more bonds differ. (21.4; 22.1)
Subcritical reaction (nuclear) a reaction in which less than one neutron causes another ﬁssion event and the process dies out. (18.6)
Sublimation the process by which a substance goes directly from the
solid to the gaseous state without passing through the liquid state.
(10.8)
Subshell a set of orbitals with a given azimuthal quantum number.
(7.6)
Substitution reaction (hydrocarbons) a reaction in which an atom,
usually a halogen, replaces a hydrogen atom in a hydrocarbon.
(22.1)
Supercooling the process of cooling a liquid below its freezing point
without its changing to a solid. (10.8)
Supercritical reaction (nuclear) a reaction in which more than one
neutron from each ﬁssion event causes another ﬁssion event. The
process rapidly escalates to a violent explosion. (18.6)
Superheating the process of heating a liquid above its boiling point
without its boiling. (10.8)
Superoxide a compound containing the O2 anion. (19.2)
Surface tension the resistance of a liquid to an increase in its surface
area. (10.2)
Surroundings everything in the universe surrounding a thermodynamic system. (6.1)
Syndiotactic chain a polymer chain in which the substituent groups
such as CH3 are arranged on alternate sides of the chain. (22.5)
Syngas synthetic gas, a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen,
obtained by coal gasiﬁcation. (6.6)
System (thermodynamic) that part of the universe on which attention is to be focused. (6.1)
Systematic error an error that always occurs in the same direction.
(1.4)
Tempering a process in steel production that ﬁne-tunes the proportions of carbon crystals and cementite by heating to intermediate
temperatures followed by rapid cooling. (21.8)
Termolecular step a reaction involving the simultaneous collision of
three molecules. (12.6)
Tertiary structure (of a protein) the overall shape of a protein, long
and narrow or globular, maintained by different types of
intramolecular interactions. (22.6)
Theoretical yield the maximum amount of a given product that can
be formed when the limiting reactant is completely consumed. (3.10)
Theory a set of assumptions put forth to explain some aspect of the
observed behavior of matter. (1.2)
Thermal pollution the oxygen-depleting effect on lakes and rivers of
using water for industrial cooling and returning it to its
natural source at a higher temperature. (11.3)

A37

Thermodynamic stability (nuclear) the potential energy of a particular nucleus as compared to the sum of the potential energies of
its component protons and neutrons. (18.1)
Thermodynamics the study of energy and its interconversions. (6.1)
Thermoplastic polymer a substance that when molded to a certain
shape under appropriate conditions can later be remelted. (22.5)
Thermoset polymer a substance that when molded to a certain shape
under pressure and high temperatures cannot be softened again or
dissolved. (22.5)
Third law of thermodynamics the entropy of a perfect crystal at 0 K
is zero. (16.5)
Titration a technique in which one solution is used to analyze
another. (4.8)
Torr another name for millimeter of mercury (mm Hg). (5.1)
Transfer RNA (tRNA) a small RNA fragment that ﬁnds speciﬁc
amino acids and attaches them to the protein chain as dictated by
the codons in mRNA. (22.6)
Transition metals several series of elements in which inner orbitals
(d or f orbitals) are being ﬁlled. (7.11; 19.1)
Transuranium elements the elements beyond uranium that are made
artiﬁcially by particle bombardment. (18.3)
Triple bond a bond in which three pairs of electrons are shared by
two atoms. (8.8)
Triple point the point on a phase diagram at which all three states of
a substance are present. (10.9)
Tyndall effect the scattering of light by particles in a suspension.
(11.8)
Uncertainty (in measurement) the characteristic that any measurement involves estimates and cannot be exactly reproduced. (1.4)
Unimolecular step a reaction step involving only one molecule.
(12.6)
Unit cell the smallest repeating unit of a lattice. (10.3)
Unit factor method an equivalence statement between units used for
converting from one unit to another. (1.6)
Universal gas constant the combined proportionality constant in the
ideal gas law; 0.08206 L atm/K mol or 8.3145 J/K mol. (5.3)
Valence electrons the electrons in the outermost principal quantum
level of an atom. (7.11)
Valence shell electron-pair repulsion (VSEPR) model a model
whose main postulate is that the structure around a given atom in
a molecule is determined principally by minimizing electron-pair
repulsions. (8.13)
Van der Waals equation a mathematical expression for describing
the behavior of real gases. (5.8)
Van’t Hoff factor the ratio of moles of particles in solution to moles
of solute dissolved. (11.7)
Vapor pressure the pressure of the vapor over a liquid at equilibrium. (10.8)
Vaporization (evaporization) the change in state that occurs when a
liquid evaporates to form a gas. (10.8)
Viscosity the resistance of a liquid to ﬂow. (10.2)
Volt the unit of electrical potential deﬁned as one joule of work per
coulomb of charge transferred. (17.1)
Voltmeter an instrument that measures cell potential by drawing electric current through a known resistance. (17.1)
Volumetric analysis a process involving titration of one solution with
another. (4.8)

A38

Glossary

Vulcanization a process in which sulfur is added to rubber and the
mixture is heated, causing crosslinking of the polymer chains and
thus adding strength to the rubber. (22.5)
Wave function a function of the coordinates of an electron’s
position in three-dimensional space that describes the properties of
the electron. (7.5)
Wave mechanical model a model for the hydrogen atom in which
the electron is assumed to behave as a standing wave. (7.5)
Wavelength the distance between two consecutive peaks or troughs
in a wave. (7.1)
Weak acid an acid that dissociates only slightly in aqueous solution.
(4.2; 14.2)
Weak base a base that reacts with water to produce hydroxide ions
to only a slight extent in aqueous solution. (4.2; 14.6)
Weak electrolyte a material which, when dissolved in water, gives a
solution that conducts only a small electric current. (4.2)

Weight the force exerted on an object by gravity. (1.3)
Work force acting over a distance. (6.1)
X-ray diffraction a technique for establishing the structure of crystalline solids by directing X rays of a single wavelength at a crystal and obtaining a diffraction pattern from which interatomic spaces
can be determined. (10.3)
Zone of nuclear stability the area encompassing the stable nuclides
on a plot of their positions as a function of the number of protons
and the number of neutrons in the nucleus. (18.1)
Zone reﬁning a metallurgical process for obtaining a highly pure
metal that depends on continuously melting the impure material and
recrystallizing the pure metal. (21.8)

Photo Credits
Chapter 1 p. xxiv: Ed Reschke. p. 2: (top left), DI/Veeco Metrology. p. 2: (top
right), Courtesy, Dr. Randall M. Feenstra. p. 2: (bottom), Courtesy of IBM
Research, Almaden Research Center. All rights reserved. p. 3: (top left), Courtesy, David Wineland. p. 3: (inset photo), Dr. Jeremy Burgess/Science Photo
Library/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 3: (bottom right), Chuck Place. p. 4: Dennis
Brack/Estock/National Gallery of Art, Washington DC, Gallery Archives. p. 6,
Corbis/Bettmann. p. 8: (top), NASA. p. 8: (bottom), Steve Borick/American
Color. p. 10: Courtesy, Mettler Toledo, p. 16: Steve Borick/American Color.
p. 21: Peter Steiner/The Stock Market/Corbis. p. 23: (top) Courtesy, Briton
Engineering Developments, (bottom), Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs. p 27: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 29: (bottom), Kristen Brockmann/Fundamental Photographs. Chapter 2 p. 38: (c) UNEP/Peter Arnold, Inc. p. 40:
(top), Courtesy, Roald Hoffman/Cornell University. p. 40: (bottom), Paul Souders/ Stone/Getty Images. p. 41: (Detail) Antoine Laurent Lavoisier and His
Wife by Jacques Louis David, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Purchase, Mr.
and Mrs. Charles Wrightsman. Gift, in honor of Everett Fahy, 1977. p. 42: Reproduced by permission, Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society.
p. 44: The Granger Collection, NY. p. 45: The Cavendish Laboratory. p. 46:
Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs. p. 47: Roger Du Buisson/The Stock
Market/Corbis. p. 48: (top), Bob Daemmrich/Stock Boston. p. 48: (bottom),
Topham Picture Library/The Image Works. p. 50: Steve Borick/American
Color. p. 53: (left), Frank Cox. p. 53: (right), Ken O’Donoghue. p. 54: (far
left), Ken O’Donoghue. p. 54: (center left), Sean Brady/American Color. p. 54:
(center right), Sean Brady/American Color. p. 54: (far right), Charles D.
Winters/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 55: (top), Ken O’Donoghue. p. 55: (bottom), Steve Borick/American Color. p. 60: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 61:
Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs. Chapter 3 p. 76: Ken Karp. p. 79:
Siede Preis/Photodisc/Getty Images. p. 78: Geoff Tompkinson/Science
Library/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 79: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 80: Tom
Pantages. p. 81: (top), Courtesy, Joseph Wilmnoff/University of Washington
and Luann Becker/University of Hawaii. p. 81: (bottom), Jeff J. Daly/Visuals
Unlimited. p. 82: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 84: (left), Sean Brady/American Color.
p. 84: (right), Tom Pantages. p. 85: Russ Lappa/Science Source/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 87: Grace Davies/Photo Network. p. 88: Kenneth Lorenzen.
p. 90: Phil Degginger/Stone/Getty Images. p. 94: (both), Ken O’Donoghue.
p. 95: Frank Cox. p. 97: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 98: Sean Brady/
American Color. p. 101: (both), Ken O’Donoghue. p. 105: NASA. p. 106: Steve
Borick/American Color. p. 108: Grant Heilman Photography. p. 112: AP
Photo/Marc Matheny. Chapter 4 p. 126: Richard Megna/Fundamental
Photographs. p. 130: (all), Ken O’Donoghue. p. 132: The Swedish Royal
Academy of Sciences. p. 135: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 136: Ken
O’Donoghue. p. 138: Image courtesy of Caliper Technologies Corporation.
p. 140: Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs. p. 141: (left), Steve
Borick/American Color, p. 141: (right), Steve Borick/American Color. p. 142:
Sean Brady/American Color. p. 143: (all), © Houghton Mifﬂin Company.
p. 144: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 152: Richard Megna/Fundamental
Photographs. p. 155: (left), Sean Brady. p. 155: (center left), Ken O’Donoghue.
p. 155: (center right), Ken O’Donoghue. p. 155: (far right), Sean Brady/American
Color. p. 156: Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs. p. 158: Sean Brady/
American Color. p. 160: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 161: C Squared
Studios/PhotoDisc/PictureQuest. p. 165: (all) © Houghton Mifﬂin Company;
Chapter 5 p. 178: James Sparshatt/Corbis. p. 179: (both), Sean Brady/American
Color. p. 181: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 184: Nick Nicholson/The Image
Bank/Getty Images. p. 187: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 190: Runk/Schoenberger/
Grant Heilman Photography. p. 191: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 197:
Courtesy, Ford Motor Corporation. p. 200: (both), Steve Borick/American

Color. p. 203: (all), Ken O’Donoghue. p. 207: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 213: (both),
The Field Museum, Chicago. p. 214: David Woodfall/Stone/Getty Images.
Chapter 6 p. 228: (c) UNEP/Peter Arnold Inc. p. 230: Courtesy, Sierra Paciﬁc
Innovations. p. 235: Mark E. Gibson/Visuals Unlimited. p. 239: Neil
Lucas/Nature Picture Library. p. 240: E.R. Degginger. p. 241: AP Photo/Itsuo
Inouye. p. 243: Argonne National Laboratory. p. 244: (left), Rich Treptow/
Visuals Unlimited. p. 244: (right), Comstock Images. p. 247: Sean Brady/
American Color. p. 251: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 253: (c) Helga
Lade/Peter Arnold Inc. p. 255: Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit. p. 257: NASA. p. 259:
Courtesy, FPL Energy LLC. p. 262: Courtesy, National Biodiesel Board, Inc.
p. 263: Arthur C. Smith III/Grant Heilman Photography. Chapter 7 p. 274:
Philip Habib/Stone/Getty Images. p. 276: David B. Fleetham/Stone/Getty
Images. p. 277: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 278: Donald Clegg. p. 280: AFP/Corbis.
p. 279: Corbis/Bettmann. p. 281: (top), Dr. David Wexler/SPL/Photo
Researchers, Inc. p. 281: (bottom), Science VU/Visuals Unlimited. p. 283:
Sony. p. 284: PictureQuest. p. 286: Emilio Segre Visuals Archives. p. 289: PhotoDisc/Getty Images. p. 290: Dave Blackburn. p. 300: Image Select/Art Resource, NY. p. 301: Annalen der Chemie und Pharmacie, VIII, Supplementary
Volume for 1872. p. 302: Courtesy, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory:
p. 304: (both), Sean Brady/American Color. p. 305: (top), Ken O’Donoghue.
p. 305: (bottom), Leslie Zumdahl. p. 309: The Granger Collection, NY.
p. 317: (top), Gabe McDonald/Visuals Unlimited. p. 317: (bottom), Sean
Brady/American Color. Chapter 8 p. 328: Ken Eward/Photo Researchers,
Inc. p. 329: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 337: (top, center), Ken
O’Donoghue. p. 337: (bottom), Sean Brady/American Color. p. 340: Courtesy,
Aluminum Company of America. p. 343: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 348:
Ken O’Donoghue. p. 349: Will & Deni McIntyre/Photo Researchers, Inc.
p. 354: Courtesy, The Bancroft Library/University of California, Berkeley.
p. 358: Carnegie Institution of Washington. Photo by Ho-Kwang Mao and J.
Shu. p. 369: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 371: (all), Ken O’Donoghue.
p. 378: Kenneth Lorenzen. p. 379: Steve Borick/American Color. Chapter 9
p. 390: Dr. Jeremy Burgess/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.
p. 399: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 407: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 411: Donald
Clegg. Chapter 10 p. 424: Robert Fried Photography. p. 430: (left, center),
Sean Brady/American Color. p. 430: (right), Ray Massey/Stone/Getty Images.
p. 431: (both) Courtesy, Lord Corporation. p. 432: (both), Brian Parker/Tom
Stack & Associates. p. 434: Bruce Fox/Michigan State University Chemistry
Photo Gallery. p. 435: (left), Comstock Images. p. 435: (center), Alfred
Pasieka/Peter Arnold Inc. p. 435: (right), Richard C. Walters/Visuals Unlimited. p. 439: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 440: Denise Applewhite/Princeton
University. p. 441: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 442: Chip Clark. p. 444:
Paul Silvermann/Fundamental Photographs. p. 445: Courtesy, RMS Titanic,
Inc. All rights reserved. p. 446: (top), Ken Eward/Photo Researchers, Inc. 446:
(bottom), Courtesy, IBM Corporation. p. 448: (top), Richard Pasley/Stock
Boston. p. 448: (bottom), Mathias Oppersdorff/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 449:
Courtesy, LiquidMetal Golf. p. 454: (left), Sean Brady/American Color. p. 454:
(center), Ken O’Donoghue. p. 454: (right), Richard Megna/Fundamental
Photographs. p. 455: Dr. Thomas Thundat/Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
p. 466: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 469: Chris Noble/Stone/Getty Images.
p. 470: Courtesy, Badger Fire Protection, Inc. Chapter 11 p. 484: Charles
Derby/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 487: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 489:
Photo Courtesy of E Ink. p. 491: E.R. Degginger. p. 493: (top left, right), Frank
Cox. p. 493: (bottom) Sean Brady/American Color. p. 496: T. Orban/Sygma/
Corbis. p. 497: Betz/Visuals Unlimited. p. 500: David Young-Wolfe/PhotoEdit.
p. 505: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 506: (top), Craig Newbauer/Peter
Arnold, Inc. p. 507: Leslie Zumdahl. p. 510: Visuals Unlimited. p. 511: (left),

A39

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

A40

Photo Credits

Stanley Flagler/Visuals Unlimited. p. 511: (center, right), David M. Phillips/
Visuals Unlimited. p. 512: Courtesy, Southern California Electric. p. 514: Stephen
Frisch. p. 515: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 516: Doug Allan/Animals,
Animals. Chapter 12 p. 526: Vandystadt/TIPS Images. p. 528: (top left), Bob
Daemmrich/Stock Boston. p. 528: (top right), Thomas H. Brakeﬁeld/The Stock
Market/Corbis. p. 528: (bottom left), Tom Stillo/Omni-Photo Communications.
p. 528: (bottom right), E. Bordis/Estock Photo. p. 531: (left), Chad Ehlers/Photo
Network. p. 531: (right), Stephen L. Saks/Photo Network. p. 555: Alvin E.
Staffan/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 558: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 567:
NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center. p. 563: Ken Eward/Photo Researchers,
Inc.
Chapter 13 p. 578: Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs. p. 585:
Grant Heilman Photography. p. 589: Martin Bond/SPL/Photo Researchers, Inc.
p. 590: Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs. p. 595: NASA. p. 608 (all):
Ken O’Donoghue. p. 609 (both): Sean Brady/American Color. p. 618 (all):
Sean Brady/American Color.
Chapter 14 p. 622: Ed Reschke/Peter Arnold,
Inc. p. 624: Eric Fordham. p. 625: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 632 (top): Copyright
Los Angeles Times Syndicate, photo from Chemical Heritage Foundation.
p. 632 (bottom): Ken O’Donoghue. p. 638: Spencer Grant/PhotoEdit. p. 642:
Ken O’Donoghue. p. 643: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 644: Bob
Daemmrich/Stock Boston. p. 645: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 649: E.R.
Degginger. p. 653: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 666: E.R. Degginger.
Chapter 15 p. 680: Demetrio Carrasco/Stone/Getty Images. p. 684: Ken
O’Donoghue. p. 686 (both): Ken O’Donoghue. p. 696: Steve Borick/American
Color. p. 711 (both): Sean Brady/American Color. p. 712: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 713: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 714: Steve Borick/American Color.
p. 717: CNRI/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 719: Ken
O’Donoghue. p. 720: Max A. Listgarten/Visuals Unlimited. p. 722: Ken
O’Donoghue. p. 729 (both): Ken O’Donoghue. p. 730: Sean Brady/American
Color. p. 732: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 734 (both): Richard
Megna/Fundamental Photographs.
Chapter 16 p. 748: Barry L. Runk/Grant
Heilman Photography. p. 751 (top): Kent & Donna Dennen/Photo Researchers,
Inc. p. 751 (bottom): Sean Brady/American Color. p. 757: Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit. p. 759: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 777: Hank Morgan/Rainbow.
Chapter 17 p. 790: Jeff J. Daly/Visuals Unlimited. p. 794: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 800: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 801: Courtesy, the Royal
Institution of Great Britain. p. 803 (top): Sean Brady/American Color. p. 803
(bottom): Steve Borick/American Color. p. 807: Ken O’Donoghue. p. 808: Ken
O’Donoghue. p. 809: AP Photo/Ed Bailey. p. 812 (top): AutoWeek/Crain Communications, Inc. p. 812 (bottom): Paul Silverman/Fundamental Photographs.
p. 819: Charles D. Winters/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 820: Courtesy, Mel
Fisher’s Motivation, Inc. p. 822: Courtesy, Oberlin College Archives, Oberlin,
Ohio. p. 823: Tom Hollyman/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 824: Bill Gallery/Stock
Boston.
Chapter 18 p. 840: Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
p. 847: Simon Fraser/Medical Physics: RVI, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne/SPL/Photo
Researchers, Inc. p. 851 (top): Arizona State University and NASA. p. 851
(bottom): James A. Sugar/Corbis. p. 853 (top): Mark A. Philbrick/Brigham Young
University. p. 853 (bottom): Peter Dunwiddle/Visuals Unlimited. p. 855 (left,
center): SIU/Visuals Unlimited. p. 855 (right): Richard Megna/Fundamental

Photographs. p. 862: Marvin Lazarus/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 865 (both):
Courtesy Fermilab Visual Media Services.
Chapter 19 p. 874: Oliver
Meckes/Nicole Ottawa/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 878: Wendell Metzen/Bruce
Coleman, Inc. p. 880: E.R. Degginger. p. 881 (top): Steve Borick/American
Color. p. 881 (bottom): Peter Skinner/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 882: Yoav
Levy/Phototake. p. 883: Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs. p. 886
(top): Sean Brady/American Color. p. 886 (bottom): Hoa Qui/Index Stock
Imagery/PictureQuest. p. 887: Spencer Swanger/Tom Stack & Associates.
p. 889: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 890: Andrea Pistolesi/The Image
Bank/Getty Images. p. 891 (top): M. Kulyk/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 893
(top): The Granger Collection, NY. p. 893 (bottom): Michael Holford. p. 894:
Sean Brady/American Color. Chapter 20 p. 900: Kjell B. Sandved/Visuals
Unlimted. p. 904 (top): Ron Sherman/Stone/Getty Images. p. 904 (bottom):
Courtesy Inert Systems. p. 905: Randy G. Taylor/Estock Photo. p. 906: Hugh
Spencer/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 909: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 910:
Sean Brady/American Color. p. 915: R.H. Laron/PhotoEdit. p. 921 (top left,
bottom): Ken O’Donoghue. p. 921 (top right): E.R. Degginger. p. 922 (left):
E.R. Degginger. p. 922 (right): Farrell Greham/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 923
(all): Steve Borick/American Color. p. 925: Tom Pantages. p. 926 (top): E.R.
Degginger. p. 926 (bottom): Yoav Levy/Phototake. p. 928: James L. Amos/
Peter Arnold, Inc. p. 931: E.R. Degginger. p. 932: Deborah Davis/PhotoEdit.
Chapter 21 p. 942: Bios/Peter Arnold, Inc. p. 945: Peter Harholdt/Superstock.
p. 946 (top two): Paul Silverman/Fundamental Photographs. p. 946 (center left):
Sean Brady/American Color, Courtesy, Charles Lewis. p. 946 (center right):
Ken O’Donoghue. p. 946 (bottom left): Sean Brady/American Color. p. 950
(top): RNHRD NHS Trust/Stone/Getty Images. p. 950 (bottom): Ken
O’Donoghue. p. 953: Jodi Jacobson/Peter Arnold, Inc. p. 954: Sean Brady/
American Color. p. 959 (both): Sean Brady/American Color. p. 963: Martin
Bough/Fundamental Photographs. p. 971 (top): Tom Pantages. p. 971 (bottom):
Ken O’Donoghue. p. 977: p. 977 (top): Stanley Flegler/Visual Unlimited.
p. 977 (bottom): Galen Rowell/Peter Arnold, Inc. p. 979: Victoire de Marco
Pantani/Liaison/Getty News Images. p. 978: Luis Veiga/The Image Bank/Getty
Images. p. 991: Sean Brady/American Color. p. 992: Sean Brady/American
Color. Chapter 22 p. 996: Alfred Pasieka/Science Photo Library/Photo
Researchers, Inc. p. 1003: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 1007: Chuck Keeler
Jr./The Stock Market/Corbis. p. 1011: Ian Shaw/Stone/Getty Images. p. 1012:
AP Photo/Nati Harnik. p. 1013: Inga Spence/Visuals Unlimited. p. 1015 (top):
Steve Borick/American Color. p. 1015 (bottom): Laguna Design/SPL/Photo
Researchers, Inc. p. 1016: AP Photo/Indianapolis Star, Karen Ducey. p. 1017
(top): Phil Nelson. p. 1017 (bottom): Ron Boardman/Frank Lane Picture
Agency/Corbis. p. 1018: Scott White/University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
p. 1019: Wendell Metzen/Index Stock Imagery/PictureQuest. p. 1021: Sean
Brady/American Color. p. 1022: Courtesy Dupont Company. p. 1025 (top):
Bob Gomel/The Stock Market/Corbis. p. 1025 (bottom): Michael Abbey/
Science Source/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 1027: Ken Eward/Biografx/Science
Source/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 1033 (both): Sean Brady/American Color.
p. 1035: Steve Borick/American Color. p. 1037: Alfred Pasieka/Science
Source/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Answers to Selected Exercises
The answers listed here are from the Complete Solutions Guide, in which rounding is carried out at each intermediate step in a calculation in order to show
the correct number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures for that step. Therefore, an answer
given here may differ in the last digit from the result obtained by carrying extra digits throughout the entire calculation and rounding at the end (the procedure you should follow).

Chapter 1
17. A law summarizes what happens, e.g., law of conservation of mass in a
chemical reaction or the ideal gas law, PV  nRT. A theory (model) is an attempt to explain why something happens. Dalton’s atomic theory explains
why mass is conserved in a chemical reaction. The kinetic molecular theory
explains why pressure and volume are inversely related at constant temperature and moles of gas. 19. A qualitative observation expresses what makes
something what it is; it does not involve a number; e.g., the air we breathe is
a mixture of gases, ice is less dense than water, rotten milk stinks. The SI units
are mass in grams, length in meters, and volume in the derived units of m3.
The assumed uncertainty in a number is 1 in the last signiﬁcant ﬁgure of the
number. The precision of an instrument is related to the number of signiﬁcant
ﬁgures associated with an experimental reading on that instrument. Different
instruments for measuring mass, length, or volume have varying degrees of
precision. Some instruments only give a few signiﬁcant ﬁgures for a measurement while others will give more signiﬁcant ﬁgures. 21. Signiﬁcant ﬁgures are the digits we associate with a number. They contain all of the certain
digits and the ﬁrst uncertain digit (the ﬁrst estimated digit). What follows is
one thousand indicated to varying numbers of signiﬁcant ﬁgures: 1000 or
1  103 (1 S.F.); 1.0  103 (2 S.F.); 1.00  103 (3 S.F.); 1000. or 1.000  103
(4 S.F.). To perform the calculation, the addition/subtraction signiﬁcant rule is
applied to 1.5  1.0. The result of this is the one signiﬁcant ﬁgure answer of
0.5. Next, the multiplication/division rule is applied to 0.5 0.50. A one significant number divided by a two signiﬁcant number yields an answer with one
signiﬁcant ﬁgure 1answer  12. 23. The slope of the TF vs. TC plot is
1.8 1 9 52 and the y-intercept is 32F. The slope of TC vs. TK plot is one
and the y-intercept is 273C. 25. a. exact; b. inexact; c. exact; d. inexact 27. a. 3; b. 4; c. 4; d. 1; e. 7; f. 1; g. 3; h. 3 29. a. 3.42  104;
b. 1.034  104; c. 1.7992  101; d. 3.37  105 31. a. 641.0; b. 1.327;
c. 77.34; d. 3215; e. 0.420 33. a. 188.1; b. 12.; c. 4  107; d. 6.3 
1026; e. 4.9; Uncertainty appears in the ﬁrst decimal place. The average of
several numbers can be only as precise as the least precise number. Averages
can be exceptions to the signiﬁcant ﬁgure rules. f. 0.22 35. a. 84.3 mm;
b. 2.41 m; c. 2.945  105 cm; d. 14.45 km; e. 2.353  105 mm;
f. 0.9033 ␮m 37. a. 8 lb and 9.9 oz; 20 14 in; b. 4.0  104 km, 4.0  107 m;
c. 1.2  102 m3, 12 L, 730 in3, 0.42 ft3 39. a. 4.00  102 rods; 10.0 furlongs; 2.01  103 m; 2.01 km; b. 8390.0 rods; 209.75 furlongs; 42,195 m;
42.195 km 41. a. 0.373 kg, 0.822 lb; b. 31.1 g, 156 carats; c. 19.3 cm3
43. 2.95  109 knots; 3.36  109 mi/h 45. To the proper number of significant ﬁgures, the car is traveling at 40. mi/h, which would not violate the speed
limit. 47. 0.68 Canadian/L 49. a. 273C, 0 K; b. 40.C, 233 K;
c. 20.C, 293 K; d. 4  107 C, 4  107 K 51. a. 312.4 K; 102.6F;
b. 248 K; 13F; c. 0 K; 459F; d. 1074 K; 1470F 53. It will ﬂoat
(density  0.80 g/cm3). 55. 1  106 g/cm3 57. 0.28 cm3 59. 3.8 g/cm3
61. a. Both are the same mass; b. 1.0 mL mercury; c. Both are the same
mass; d. 1.0 L benzene 63. a. 1.0 kg feather; b. 100 g water; c. same
65. 2.77 cm 67. a. Picture iv represents a gaseous compound. Pictures ii and
iii also contain a gaseous compound but have a gaseous element present.
b. Picture vi represents a mixture of two elemental gases. c. Picture v
represents a solid element. d. Pictures ii and iii both represent a mixture
of a gaseous element and a gaseous compound. 69. a. heterogeneous;

b. homogeneous (hopefully); c. homogeneous; d. homogeneous (hopefully);
e. heterogeneous; f. heterogeneous 71. a. physical; b. chemical;
c. physical; d. chemical 73. 24 capsules 75. 1.0  105 bags 77. 56.56°C
79. a. Volume  density  mass; the orange block is more dense. Since mass
(orange)  mass (blue) and volume (orange)  volume (blue), then the density of the orange block must be greater to account for the larger mass of the
orange block. b. Which block is more dense cannot be determined. Since mass
(orange)  mass (blue) and volume (orange)  volume (blue), then the density of the orange block may or may not be larger than the blue block. If the
blue block is more dense, then its density cannot be so large that the mass of
the smaller blue block becomes larger than the orange block mass. c. The blue
block is more dense. Since mass (blue)  mass (orange) and volume (blue) 
volume (orange), then the density of the blue block must be larger to equate
the masses. d. The blue block is more dense. Since mass (blue) 
mass (orange) and the volumes are equal, then the density of the blue
block must be larger to give the blue block the larger mass.
81. 8.5  0.5 g/cm3 83. a. 2%; b. 2.2%; c. 0.2% 85. dold  8.8 g/cm3,
dnew  7.17 g/cm3; dnew/dold  massnew/massold  0.81; The difference in mass
is accounted for by the difference in the alloy used (if the assumptions are
correct). 87. 7.0% 89. a. One possibility is that rope B is not attached
to anything and rope A and rope C are connected via a pair of pulleys and/or
gears; b. Try to pull rope B out of the box. Measure the distance moved
by C for a given movement of A. Hold either A or C ﬁrmly while pulling
on the other rope. 91. $160/person; 3.20  103 nickels/person; 85.6 £/person 93. 200.0F  93.33C; 100.0F  73.3C; 93.33C  366.48 K;
73.3C  199.9 K; difference of temperatures in C  166.6; difference
of temperatures in K  166.6; No, there is not a difference of 300 degrees
in C or K.

Chapter 2
15. A compound will always contain the same numbers (and types) of atoms.
A given amount of hydrogen will react only with a speciﬁc amount of oxygen.
Any excess oxygen will remain unreacted. 17. Law of conservation of mass:
mass is neither created nor destroyed. The mass before a chemical reaction
always equals the mass after a chemical reaction. Law of deﬁnite proportion:
a given compound always contains exactly the same proportion of elements by
mass. Water is always 1 g H for every 8 g oxygen. Law of multiple proportions: When two elements form a series of compounds, the ratios of the mass
of the second element that combine with one gram of the ﬁrst element can
always be reduced to small whole numbers. For CO2 and CO discussed in
section 2.2, the mass ratios of oxygen that react with 1 g of carbon in each
compound are in a 2 : 1 ratio. 19. J. J. Thomson’s study of cathode-ray tubes
led him to postulate the existence of negatively charged particles which we
now call electrons. Ernest Rutherford and his alpha bombardment of metal foil
experiments led him to postulate the nuclear atom—an atom with a tiny dense
center of positive charge (the nucleus) with electrons moving about the nucleus
at relatively large distances away; the distance is so large that an atom is mostly
empty space. 21. The number and arrangement of electrons in an atom determines how the atom will react with other atoms. The electrons determine
the chemical properties of an atom. The number of neutrons present determine
the isotope identity. 23. Statements a and b are true. Counting over in the
periodic table, element 118 will be the next noble gas (a nonmetal). For statement c, hydrogen has mostly nonmetallic properties. For statement d, a family of elements is also known as a group of elements. For statement e, two
items are incorrect. When a metal reacts with a nonmetal, an ionic compound
is produced and the formula of the compound would be AX2 (since alkaline
earth metals for 2 ions and halogens form 1 ions in ionic compounds). The
correct statement would be: When alkaline earth metal, A reacts with a

A41

A42

Answers to Selected Exercises

halogen, X, the formula of the ionic compound formed should be AX2.
25. a. The composition of a substance depends on the number of atoms of
each element making up the compound (depends on the formula of the compound) and not on the composition of the mixture from which it was formed.
b. Avogadro’s hypothesis implies that volume ratios are equal to molecule
ratios at constant temperature and pressure. H2(g)  Cl2(g) n 2 HCl(g);
from the balanced equation, the volume of HCl produced will be twice the
volume of H2 (or Cl2) reacted. 27. All the masses of hydrogen in these three
compounds can be expressed as simple whole-number ratios. The g H/g N in
hydrazine, ammonia, and hydrogen azide are in the ratios 6:9:1. 29. O, 7.94;
Na, 22.8; Mg, 11.9; O and Mg are incorrect by a factor of 2; correct formulas
are H2O, Na2O, and MgO. 31. Using r  5  1014 cm, dnucleus  3  1015
g cm3; using r  1  108 cm, datom  0.4 g cm3 33. 37 35. sodium, Na;
radium, Ra; iron, Fe; gold, Au; manganese, Mn; lead, Pb 37. Sn, tin; Pt, platinum; Hg, mercury; Mg, magnesium; K, potassium; Ag, silver 39. a. Metals:
Mg, Ti, Au, Bi, Ge, Eu, Am; nonmetals: Si, B, At, Rn, Br; b. metalloids: Si,
Ge, B, At. The elements at the boundary between the metals and the nonmetals
are B, Si, Ge, As, Sb, Te, Po, and At. These elements are all considered metalloids. Aluminum has mostly properties of metals. 41. a. 6; b. 5; c. 4;
d. 6 43. a. 35 p, 44 n, 35 e; b. 35 p, 46 n, 35 e; c. 94 p, 145 n, 94 e;
d. 55 p, 78 n, 55 e; e. 1 p, 2 n, 1 e; f. 26 p, 30 n, 26 e 45. a. 178O; b. 37
17Cl;
57
131
7
3
118
2
c. 60
47. 151
49. 238
27Co; d. 26Fe; e. 53I; f. 3Li
63Eu ;
50Sn
92U, 92 p,
2
51 3
89
146 n, 92 e, 0; 40
20Ca , 20 p, 20 n, 18 e, 2; 23V , 23 p, 28 n, 20 e, 3; 39Y,

31 3
39 p, 50 n, 39 e, 0; 79
35Br , 35 p, 44 n, 36 e, 1; 15P , 15 p, 16 n, 18 e, 3
51. a. transition metals; b. alkaline earth metals; c. alkali metals; d. noble
gases; e. halogens 53. a. lose 2 e to form Ra2; b. lose 3 e to form In3;
c. gain 3 e to form P3; d. gain 2 e to form Te2; e. gain 1 e to form
Br; f. lose 1 e to form Rb 55. a. sodium bromide; b. rubidium oxide; c. calcium sulﬁde; d. aluminum iodide; e. SrF2; f. Al2Se3; g. K3N;
h. Mg3P2 57. a. cesium ﬂuoride; b. lithium nitride; c. silver sulﬁde (Silver forms only 1 ions so no Roman numerals are needed); d. manganese(IV)
oxide; e. titanium(IV) oxide; f. strontium phosphide 59. a. barium sulﬁte;
b. sodium nitrite; c. potassium permanganate; d. potassium dichromate
61. a. dinitrogen
tetroxide; b. iodine
trichloride; c. sulfur
dioxide;
d. diphosphorus pentasulﬁde 63. a. copper(I) iodide; b. copper(II) iodide;
c. cobalt(II) iodide; d. sodium carbonate; e. sodium hydrogen carbonate
or sodium bicarbonate; f. tetrasulfur tetranitride; g. sulfur hexaﬂuoride;
h. sodium hypochlorite; i. barium chromate; j. ammonium nitrate 65. a. SF2;
b. SF6; c. NaH2PO4; d. Li3N; e. Cr2(CO3)3; f. SnF2; g. NH4C2H3O2;
h. NH4HSO4; i. Co(NO3)3; j. Hg2Cl2; Mercury(I) exists as Hg22 ions.
k. KClO 3 ; l. NaH 67. a. Na 2O; b. Na 2O 2 ; c. KCN; d. Cu(NO 3) 2 ;
e. SeBr4; f. HIO2; g. PbS2; h. CuCl; i. GaAs (from the positions in the periodic table, Ga3 and As3 are the predicted ions); j. CdSe; k. ZnS; l. HNO2;
m. P2O5 69. a. nitric acid, HNO3; b. perchloric acid, HClO4; c. acetic
acid, HC2H3O2; d. sulfuric acid, H2SO4; e. phosphoric acid, H3PO4 71. Yes,
1.0 g H would react with 37.0 g 37Cl and 1.0 g H would react with 35.0 g 35Cl.
No, the mass ratio of H/Cl would always be 1 g H/37 g Cl for 37Cl and 1 g
H/35 g Cl for 35Cl. As long as we had pure 35Cl or pure 37Cl, these ratios will
always hold. If we have a mixture (such as the natural abundance of chlorine),
the ratio will also be constant as long as the composition of the mixture of the
two isotopes does not change. 73. Only statement a is true. For statement b,
X has 34 protons. For statement c, X has 45 neutrons. For statement d, X is
selenium. 75. a. lead(II) acetate; b. copper(II) sulfate; c. calcium oxide;
d. magnesium sulfate; e. magnesium hydroxide; f. calcium sulfate; g. dinitrogen monoxide or nitrous oxide (common) 77. X  Ra, 142 neutrons
79. a. Ca3N2; calcium nitride; b. K2O; potassium oxide; c. RbF; rubidium
ﬂuoride; d. MgS; magnesium sulﬁde; e. BaI2; barium iodide; f. Al2Se3; aluminum selenide; g. Cs3P; cesium phosphide; h. InBr3; indium(III) bromide
(In forms compounds with 1 and 3 ions. You would predict a 3 ion from
the position of In in the periodic table.) 81. 116 g S; 230. g O 83. Cu, Ag,
and Au 85. C:H  8:18 or 4:9 87. The ratio of the masses of R that combine with 1.00 g Q is 3:1, as expected by the law of multiple proportions. R3Q
is the formula of the ﬁrst compound. 89. a. The compounds are isomers of
each other. Isomers are compounds with the same formula but the atoms are
attached differently, resulting in different properties. b. When wood burns,

most of the solid material is converted to gases, which escape. c. Atoms are
not an indivisible particle. Atoms are composed of electrons, neutrons, and
protons. d. The two hydride samples contain different isotopes of either hydrogen and/or lithium. Isotopes may have different masses but have similar
chemical properties. 91. tantalum(V) oxide; the formula would have the same
subscripts, Ta2S5; 40 protons 93. Ge4; 99Tc

Chapter 3
19. From the relative abundances, there would be 9889 atoms of 12C and 111
atoms of 13C in the 10,000-atom sample. The average mass of carbon is independent of the sample size; it will always be 12.01 amu. The total mass would
be 1.201  105 amu. For one mol of carbon 16.022  1023 atoms C2, the average mass would still be 12.01 amu. There would be 5.955  1023 atoms of
12
C and 6.68  1021 atoms of 13C. The total mass would be 7.232  1024 amu.
The total mass in grams is 12.01 g/mol. 21. Each person would have 100 trillion dollars. 23. The mass percent of a compound is a constant no matter
what amount of substance is present. Compounds always have constant
composition. 25. The information needed is mostly the coefﬁcients in the
balanced equation and the molar masses of the reactants and products. For
percent yield, we would need the actual yield of the reaction and the amounts
of reactants used.
a. mass of CB produced  1.00  104 molecules
A2B2 

1 mol A2B2
6.022  1023 molecules A2B2



2 mol CB
molar mass of CB

1 mol A2B2
mol CB

b. atoms of A produced  1.00  104 molecules A2B2 

2 atoms A
1 molecule A2B2

c. mol of C reacted  1.00  104 molecules
A2B2 
d. %yield 

1 mol A2B2
6.022  1023 molecules A2B2



2 mol C
1 mol A2B2

actual mass
 100; The theoretical mass of CB produced
theoretical mass

was calculated in part a. If the actual mass of CB produced is given, then the
percent yield can be determined for the reaction using the percent yield equation. 27. 207.2 amu, Pb 29. 185 amu 31. There are three peaks in the
mass spectrum, each 2 mass units apart. This is consistent with two isotopes,
differing in mass by two mass units. 33. 4.64  1020 g Fe 35. 1.00  1022
atoms C 37. Al2O3, 101.96 g mol; Na3AlF6, 209.95 g mol 39. a. 17.03
g mol; b. 32.05 g/mol; c. 252.08 g/mol 41. a. 0.0587 mol NH3;
b. 0.0312 mol N2H4; c. 3.97  103 mol (NH4)2Cr2O7 43. a. 85.2 g NH3;
b. 160. g N2H4; c. 1260 g (NH4)2Cr2O7 45. a. 70.1 g N; b. 140. g N;
c. 140. g N 47. a. 3.54  1022 molecules NH3; b. 1.88  1022 molecules
N2H4; c. 2.39  1021 formula units (NH4)2Cr2O7 49. a. 3.54  1022 atoms
N; b. 3.76  1022 atoms N; c. 4.78  1021 atoms N 51. 176.12 g/mol;
2.839  103 mol; 1.710  1021 molecules 53. a. 0.9393 mol;
b. 2.17  104 mol; c. 2.5  108 mol 55. a. 4.01  1022 atoms N;
b. 5.97  1022 atoms N; c. 3.67  1022 atoms N; d. 6.54  1022 atoms N
57. a. 294.30 g/mol; b. 3.40  102 mol; c. 459 g; d. 1.0  1019 molecules; e. 4.9  1021 atoms; f. 4.9  1013 g; g. 4.887  1022 g
59. a. 50.00% C, 5.595% H, 44.41% O; b. 55.80% C, 7.025% H, 37.18% O;
c. 67.90% C, 5.699% H, 26.40% N 61. NO2  N2O4  NO  N2O
63. 1360 g/mol 65. a. 39.99% C, 6.713% H, 53.30% O; b. 40.00% C,
6.714% H, 53.29% O; c. 40.00% C, 6.714% H, 53.29% O (all the same except for rounding differences) 67. a. NO2; b. CH2; c. P2O5; d. CH2O
69. C8H11O3N 71. compound I: HgO; compound II: Hg2O 73. SN; S4N4
75. C3H5O2; C6H10O4 77. C3H8 79. C3H4, C9H12 81. a. C6H12O6(s) 
6O2(g) n 6CO2(g)  6H2O(g); b. Fe2S3(s)  6HCl(g) n 2FeCl3(s) 
3H2S(g); c. CS2(l)  2NH3(g) n H2S(g)  NH4SCN(s) 83. a. 3Ca(OH)2(aq)
 2H3PO4(aq) n 6H2O(l)  Ca3(PO4)2(s); b. Al(OH)3(s)  3HCl(aq) n
AlCl3(aq)  3H2O(l); c. 2AgNO3(aq)  H2SO4(aq) n Ag2SO4(s) 
2HNO3(aq) 85. a. 2C6H6(l )  15O2(g) n 12CO2(g)  6H2O(g);
b. 2C4H10(g)  13O2(g) n 8CO2(g)  10H2O(g); c. C12H22O11(s) 

Answers to Selected Exercises
12O2(g) n 12CO2(g)  11H2O(g); d. 4Fe(s)  3O2(g) n 2Fe2O3(s);
e. 4FeO(s)  O2(g) n 2Fe2O3(s) 87. a. SiO2(s)  2C(s) n Si(s)  2CO(g);
b. SiCl4(l)  2Mg(s) n Si(s)  2MgCl2(s); c. Na2SiF6(s)  4Na(s) n Si(s) 
6NaF(s) 89. 7.26 g Al; 21.5 g Fe2O3; 13.7 g Al2O3 91. 4.355 kg 93. 32
kg 95. a. 73.9 g; b. 1.30  102 g 97. 2NO(g)  O2(g) n 2NO2(g); NO
is limiting. 99. 0.301 g H2O2; 3.6  102 g HCl in excess 101. 2.81  106 g
HCN; 5.63  106 g H2O 103. 1.96 g (theoretical yield); 76.5% 105. 1.20 
103 kg  1.20 metric tons 107. 6 109. a. stoichiometric mixture; b. O2;
c. H2; d. H2; e. H2; f. stoichiometric mixture; g. H2 111. 9.25  1022
H atoms 113. 4.30  102 mol; 2.50 g 115. 5 117. 42.8% 119. 81.1 g
121. 86.2% 123. C20H30O 125. C7H5N3O6 127. 38.7% 129. 40.08%
131. N4H6 133. 1.8  106 g Cu(NH3)4Cl2; 5.9  105 g NH3 135. 207
amu, Pb 137. Al2Se3 139. 0.48 mol 141. a. 113 Fe atoms; b. mass 
9.071  1020 g; c. 540 Ru atoms 143. M  Y, X  Cl, yttrium(III)
chloride; 1.84 g

Chapter 4
9. a. Polarity is a term applied to covalent compounds. Polar covalent compounds have an unequal sharing of electrons in bonds that results in an unequal
charge distribution in the overall molecule. Polar molecules have a partial negative end and a partial positive end. These are not full charges like in ionic
compounds, but are charges much less in magnitude. Water is a polar molecule and dissolves other polar solutes readily. The oxygen end of water (the
partial negative end of the polar water molecule) aligns with the partial positive end of the polar solute while the hydrogens of water (the partial positive
end of the polar water molecule) align with the partial negative end of the
solute. These opposite charged attractions stabilize polar solutes in water. This
process is called hydration. Nonpolar solutes do not have permanent partial
negative and partial positive ends; nonpolar solutes are not stabilized in water and do not dissolve. b. KF is a soluble ionic compound so it is a strong
electrolyte. KF(aq) actually exists as separate hydrated K ions and hydrated
F ions in solution: C6H12O6 is a polar covalent molecule that is a nonelectrolyte. C6H12O6 is hydrated as described in part a. c. RbCl is a soluble ionic
compound so it exists as separate hydrated Rb ions and hydrated Cl ions in
solution. AgCl is an insoluble ionic compound so the ions stay together in
solution and fall to the bottom of the container as a precipitate. d. HNO3 is a
strong acid and exists as separate hydrated H ions and hydrated NO3 ions
in solution. CO is a polar covalent molecule and is hydrated as explained in
part a. 11. Bromides: NaBr, KBr, and HgBr (and others) would be soluble
and AgBr, PbBr2, and Hg2Br2 would be insoluble. Sulfates: Na2SO4, K2SO4,
and 1NH4 2 2SO4 (and others) would be soluble and BaSO4, CaSO4, and PbSO4
(or Hg2SO4 2 would be insoluble. Hydroxides: NaOH, KOH, Ca1OH2 2 (and
others) would be soluble and Al1OH2 3, Fe1OH2 3, and Cu1OH2 2 (and others)
would be insoluble. Phosphates: Na3PO4, K3PO4, 1NH4 2 3PO4 (and others) would
be soluble and Ag3PO4, Ca3 1PO4 2 2, and FePO4 (and others) would be insoluble. Lead: PbCl2, PbBr2, PbI2, Pb1OH2 2, PbSO4, and PbS (and others) would be
insoluble. Pb1NO3 2 2 would be a soluble Pb2 salt. 13. The Brønsted-Lowry
deﬁnitions are best for our purposes. An acid is a proton donor and a base is
a proton acceptor. A proton is an H ion. Neutral hydrogen has 1 electron and
1 proton, so an H ion is just a proton. An acid–base reaction is the transfer
of an H ion (a proton) from an acid to a base. 15. a. The species reduced
is the element that gains electrons. The reducing agent causes reduction to occur by itself being oxidized. The reducing agent is generally listed as the entire formula of the compound/ion that contains the element oxidized. b. The
species oxidized is the element that loses electrons. The oxidizing agent causes
oxidation to occur by itself being reduced. The oxidizing agent is generally
listed as the entire formula of the compound/ion that contains the element reduced. c. For simple binary ionic compounds, the actual charge on the ions
are the oxidation states. For covalent compounds, nonzero oxidation states are
pretend charges the elements would have if they were held together by ionic
bonds (assuming the bond is between two different nonmetals). Nonzero
oxidation states for elements in covalent compounds are not actual charges.
Oxidation states for covalent compounds are a bookkeeping method to keep
track of electrons in a reaction.

A43

17.

a.

Br–
Na+
–
Na+
Br
Na+
Br–

b.

Cl– 2+ Cl–
Mg
Mg2+
Cl– Cl– Cl–
Mg2+ Cl–

c. For answers c–i, we will describe what should be in each solution. For c,
the drawing should have three times as many NO3 anions as Al3 cations.
d. The drawing should have twice as many NH4 cations as SO42 anions.
e. The drawing should have equal numbers of Na cations and OH anions.
f. The drawing should have equal numbers of Fe2 cations and SO42 anions.
g. The drawing should have equal numbers of K cations and MnO4 anions.
h. The drawing should have equal numbers of H cations and ClO4 anions.
i. The drawing should have equal numbers of NH4 cations and C2H3O2 anions.
19. CaCl2(s) n Ca2(aq)  2Cl(aq) 21. a. 0.2677 M; b. 1.255  103
M; c. 8.065  103 M 23. a. MCa2  1.00 M, MNO3  2.00 M;
b. MNa  4.0 M, MSO42  2.0 M; c. MNH4  MCl  0.187 M; d. MK 
0.0564 M, MPO43  0.0188 M 25. 100.0 mL of 0.30 M AlCl3 27. 4.00 g
29. a. Place 20.0 g NaOH in a 2-L volumetric ﬂask; add water to dissolve the
NaOH and ﬁll to the mark. b. Add 500. mL of the 1.00 M NaOH stock solution to a 2-L volumetric ﬂask; ﬁll to the mark with water. c. As in a, instead
using 38.8 g K2CrO4. d. As in b, instead using 114 mL of 1.75 M K2CrO4 stock
solution. 31. MNH4  0.272 M, MSO42  0.136 M 33. 5.94  108 M
steroid 35. Aluminum nitrate, magnesium chloride, and rubidium sulfate are
soluble. 37. a. no precipitate forms; b. Al(OH)3(s); c. CaSO4(s); d. NiS(s)
39. a. No reaction occurs because all possible products are soluble salts.
b. 2Al(NO3)3(aq)  3Ba(OH)2(aq) n 2Al(OH)3(s)  3Ba(NO3)2(aq);
2Al3(aq)  6NO3(aq)  3Ba2(aq)  6OH(aq) n 2Al(OH)3(s) 
3Ba2(aq)  6NO3(aq); Al3(aq)  3OH(aq) n Al(OH)3(s); c. CaCl2(aq) 
Na2SO4(aq) n CaSO4(s)  2NaCl(aq); Ca2(aq)  2Cl(aq)  2Na(aq) 
SO42(aq) n CaSO4(s)  2Na(aq)  2Cl(aq); Ca2(aq)  SO42(aq) n
CaSO4(s); d. K2S(aq)  Ni(NO3)2(aq) n 2KNO3(aq)  NiS(s); 2K(aq) 
S2(aq)  Ni2(aq)  2NO3(aq) n 2K(aq)  2NO3(aq)  NiS(s);
Ni2(aq)  S2(aq) n NiS(s) 41. a. CuSO4(aq)  Na2S(aq) n CuS(s) 
Na2SO4(aq); Cu2(aq)  S2(aq) n CuS(s); the grey spheres are the Na spectator ions and the blue-green spheres are the SO42 spectator ions;
b. CoCl2(aq)  2NaOH(aq) n Co(OH)2(s)  2NaCl(aq); Co2(aq)  2
OH(aq) n Co(OH)2(s); the grey spheres are the Na spectator ions and the
green spheres are the Cl spectator ions; c. AgNO3(aq)  KI(aq) n AgI(s) 
KNO3(aq); Ag(aq)  I(aq) n AgI(s); the red spheres are the K
spectator ions and the blue spheres are the NO3 spectator ions
43. a. Ba2(aq)  SO42(aq) n BaSO4(s); b. Pb2(aq)  2Cl(aq) n
PbCl2(s); c. No reaction; d. No reaction; e. Cu2(aq)  2OH(aq) n
Cu(OH)2(s) 45. Ca2, Sr2, or Ba2 could all be present. 47. 0.607 g
49. 0.520 g Al(OH)3 51. 2.9 g AgCl; 0 M Ag; 0.10 M NO3; 0.075 M Ca2;
0.050 M Cl 53. 23 amu; Na 55. a. 2HClO4(aq)  Mg(OH)2(s) n
Mg(ClO4)2(aq)  2H2O(l); 2H(aq)  2ClO4(aq)  Mg(OH)2(s) n
Mg2(aq)  2ClO4(aq)  2H2O(l); 2H(aq)  Mg(OH)2(s) n Mg2(aq) 
2H2O(l); b. HCN(aq)  NaOH(aq) n NaCN(aq)  H2O(l); HCN(aq) 
Na(aq)  OH(aq) n Na(aq)  CN(aq)  H2O(l); HCN(aq)  OH(aq)
n H2O(l)  CN(aq); c. HCl(aq)  NaOH(aq) n NaCl(aq)  H2O(l);
H(aq)  Cl(aq)  Na(aq)  OH(aq) n Na(aq)  Cl(aq)  H2O(l);
H(aq)  OH(aq) n H2O(l) 57. a. KOH(aq)  HNO3(aq) n H2O(l) 
KNO3(aq); K(aq)  OH(aq)  H(aq)  NO3(aq) n H2O(l)  K(aq)
 NO3(aq); OH(aq)  H(aq) n H2O(l); b. Ba(OH)2(aq)  2HCl(aq) n
2H2O(l )  BaCl2(aq); Ba2(aq)  2OH(aq)  2H(aq)  2Cl(aq) n
Ba2(aq)  2Cl(aq)  2H2O(l); OH(aq)  H(aq) n H2O(l);
c. 3HClO4(aq)  Fe(OH)3(s) n 3H2O(l )  Fe(ClO4)3(aq); 3H(aq) 
3ClO4(aq)  Fe(OH)3(s) n 3H2O(l )  Fe3(aq)  3ClO4(aq); 3H(aq) 
Fe(OH)3(s) n 3H2O(l )  Fe3(aq) 59. a. 100. mL; b. 66.7 mL;
c. 50.0 mL 61. 2.0  102 M excess OH 63. 0.102 M 65. 0.4178 g
67. a. K, 1; O, 2; Mn, 7; b. Ni, 4; O, 2; c. Na, 1; Fe, 2; O,

A44

Answers to Selected Exercises

2; H, 1 d. H, 1; O, 2; N, 3; P, 5; e. P, 3; O, 2; f. O, 2; Fe,
 83 ; g. O, 2; F, 1; Xe, 6; h. S, 4; F, 1; i. C, 2; O, 2; j. C, 0;
H, 1; O, 2 69. a. 3; b. 3; c. 2; d. 2; e. 1; f. 4; g. 3;
h. 5; i. 0
71.
Redox?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
In

Oxidizing
Agent

Reducing
Agent

Substance
Oxidized

Substance
Reduced

Yes
Ag
Cu
Cu
Ag
No
—
—
—
—
No
—
—
—
—
Yes
SiCl4
Mg
Mg
SiCl4 (Si)
No
—
—
—
—
b, c, and e, no oxidation numbers change from reactants to products.

73. a. Zn  2HCl n Zn2  H2  2Cl; b. 2H  3I  ClO n I3 
Cl  H2O; c. 7H2O  4H  3As2O3  4NO3 n 4NO  6H3AsO4;
d. 16H  2MnO4  10Br n 5Br2  2Mn2  8H2O; e. 8H  3CH3OH
 Cr2O72 n 2Cr3  3CH2O  7H2O 75. a. 2H2O  Al  MnO4 n
Al(OH)4  MnO2; b. 2OH  Cl2 n Cl  ClO  H2O; c. OH  H2O
 NO2  2Al n NH3  2AlO2 77. 4NaCl  2H2SO4  MnO2 n
2Na2SO4  MnCl2  Cl2  2H2O 79. Only statement b is true. a. A nonelectrolyte solute can make a concentrated solution. c. Weak acids like acetic
acid, HC2H3O2, are weak electrolytes. d. Some ionic compounds do not dissolve in water (are insoluble). These compounds are not strong electrolytes
(nor any type of electrolyte). The electrolyte designation refers to solutes that
are soluble in water. 81. a. AgNO3, Pb(NO3)2, and Hg2(NO3)2 would form
precipitates with the Cl ion; Ag(aq)  Cl(aq) n AgCl(s); Pb2(aq) 
2Cl(aq) n PbCl2(s); Hg22(aq)  2Cl(aq) n Hg2Cl2(s); b. Na2SO4,
Na2CO3, and Na3PO4 would form precipitates with the Ca2 ion; Ca2(aq) 
SO42(aq) n CaSO4(s); Ca2(aq)  CO32(aq) n CaCO3(s); 3Ca2(aq) 
2PO43(aq) n Ca3(PO4)2(s); c. NaOH, Na2S, and Na2CO3 would form precipitates with the Fe3 ion; Fe3(aq)  3OH(aq) n Fe(OH)3(s); 2Fe3(aq)
 3S2(aq) n Fe2S3(s); 2Fe3(aq)  3CO32(aq) n Fe2(CO3)3(s); d. BaCl2,
Pb(NO3)2, and Ca(NO3)2 would form precipitates with the SO42 ion;
Ba2(aq)  SO42(aq) n BaSO4(s); Pb2(aq)  SO42(aq) n PbSO4(s);
Ca2(aq)  SO42(aq) n CaSO4(s); e. Na2SO4, NaCl, and NaI would form
precipitates with the Hg22 ion; Hg22(aq)  SO42(aq) n Hg2SO4(s);
Hg22(aq)  2Cl(aq) n Hg2Cl2(s); Hg22(aq)  2I(aq) n Hg2I2(s);
f. NaBr, Na2CrO4, and Na3PO4 would form precipitates with the Ag ion;
Ag(aq)  Br(aq) n AgBr(s); 2Ag(aq)  CrO42(aq) n Ag2CrO4(s);
3Ag(aq)  PO43(aq) n Ag3PO4(s) 83. Ba 85. 39.49 mg/tablet; 67.00%
87. 2.00 M 89. a. 0.8393 M; b. 5.010% 91. C6H8O6 93. Ca(OH)2,
Sr(OH)2, and Ba(OH)2 are possibilities for the base. 95. 2H(aq)  Mn(s)
 2HNO3(aq) n Mn2(aq)  2NO2(g)  2H2O(l); 3H2O(l)  2Mn2(aq) 
5IO4(aq) n 2MnO4 (aq)  5IO3(aq)  6H(aq) 97. a. 24.8% Co,
29.7% Cl, 5.09% H, 40.4% O; b. CoCl2  6H2O; c. CoCl2  6H2O(aq) 
2AgNO3(aq) n 2AgCl(s)  Co(NO3)2(aq)  6H2O(l), CoCl2  6H2O(aq) 
2NaOH(aq) n Co(OH)2(s)  2NaCl(aq)  6H2O(l), 4Co(OH)2(s)  O2(g) n
2Co2O3(s)  4H2O(l) 99. a. 7.000 M K; b. 0.750 M CrO42 101. 0.123
g SO42, 60.0% SO42; 61% K2SO4 and 39% Na2SO4 103. 4.90 M 105. Y,
2.06 mL/min; Z, 4.20 mL/min 107. 57.6 mL 109. a. MgO(s)  2HCl(aq) n
MgCl2(aq)  H2O(l), Mg(OH)2(s)  2HCl(aq) n MgCl2(aq)  2H2O(l),
Al(OH)3(s)  3HCl(aq) n AlCl3(aq)  3H2O(l); b. MgO 111. Citric acid
has three acidic hydrogens per citric acid molecule. 113. 0.07849  0.00016
M or 0.0785  0.0002 M 115. 3(NH4)2CrO4(aq)  2Cr(NO2)3(aq) n
6NH4NO2 (aq)  Cr2(CrO4)3(s); 7.34 g 117. X  Se; H2Se is hydroselenic
acid; 0.252 g

mercury, the column of water must be 13.6 times longer than that of mercury
to match the force exerted by the columns of liquid standing on the surface.
19. The P versus 1V plot is incorrect. The plot should be linear with positive
slope and a y-intercept of zero. PV  k so P  k (1/V), which is in the form
of the straight-line equation y  mx  b. 21. d  (molar mass) PRT; Because d is directly proportional to the molar mass of the gas. Helium, which
has the smallest molar mass of all the noble gases, will have the smallest density. 23. No; At any nonzero Kelvin temperature, there is a distribution of
kinetic energies. Similarily, there is a distribution of velocities at any nonzero
Kelvin temperature. 25. 2NH3 1g2 S N2 1g2  3H2 1g2; At constant P and T,
volume is directly proportional to the moles of gas present. In the reaction, the
moles of gas doubles as reactants are converted to products, so the volume of
the container should double. At constant V and T, P is directly proportional
to the moles of gas present. As the moles of gas doubles, the pressure
will double. The partial pressure of N2 will be 12 the initial pressure of
NH3 and the partial pressure of H2 will be 3/2 the initial pressure of NH3.
The partial pressure of H2 will be three times the partial pressure of N2.
27 a. 3.6  103 mm Hg; b. 3.6  103 torr; c. 4.9  105 Pa; d. 71 psi
29. 65 torr, 8.7  103 Pa, 8.6  102 atm 31. a. 642 torr, 0.845 atm; 8.56
 104 Pa; b. 975 torr; 1.28 atm; 1.30  105 Pa; c. 517 torr; 850. torr
33. The balloon will burst. 35. 0.89 mol 37. a. 14.0 L; b. 4.72  102
mol; c. 678 K; d. 133 atm 39. 4.44  103 g He; 2.24  103 g H2
41. a. 69.6 K; b. 32.3 atm 43. 1.27 mol 45. PB  2PA 47. 5.1  104
torr 49. The volume of the balloon increases from 1.00 L to 2.82 L, so the
change in volume is 1.82 L. 51. 3.21 g Al 53. 135 g NaN3 55. 1.5 
107 g Fe, 2.6  107 g 98% H2SO4 57. 2.47 mol H2O 59. a. 2CH4(g) 
2NH3(g)  3O2(g) n 2HCN(g)  6H2O(g); b. 13.3 L 61. Cl2 63. 12.6
g/L 65. 1.1 atm, PCO2  1.1 atm, PTOTAL  2.1 atm 67. PH2  317 torr,
PN2  50.7 torr, PTOTAL  368 torr 69. a. xCH4  0.412, xO2  0.588;
b. 0.161 mol; c. 1.06 g CH4, 3.03 g O2 71. 0.990 atm; 0.625 g 73. 18.0%
75. Ptot  6.0 atm; PN2  1.5 atm; PH2  4.5 atm 77. Both CH4(g)
and N2(g) have the same average kinetic energy at the various temperatures. 273 K, 5.65  1021 J/molecule; 546 K, 1.13  1020 J/molecule
79. CH4: 652 m/s (273 K); 921 m/s (546 K); N2: 493 m/s (273 K); 697 m/s
(546 K)
81.
a.
b.
c.
d.

Average KE

Average Velocity

Wall-Collision
Frequency

Increase
Decrease
Same
Same

Increase
Decrease
Same
Same

Increase
Decrease
Increase
Increase

83. a. All the same; b. Flask C 85. CF2Cl2 87. The relative rates of effusion of 12C16O, 12C17O, and 12C18O are 1.04, 1.02, and 1.00. Advantage: CO2
isn't as toxic as CO. Disadvantages: Can get a mixture of oxygen isotopes in
CO2, so some species would effuse at about the same rate. 89. a. 12.24 atm;
b. 12.13 atm; c. The ideal gas law is high by 0.91%. 91. 5.2  106 atm;
1.3  1014 atoms He/cm3 93. 2NO2(g)  H2O(l) n HNO3(aq)  HNO2(aq);
SO3(g)  H2O(l) n H2SO4 (aq)
95. a.

b.

P
PV

Chapter 5
17. higher than; 13.6 times taller; When the pressure of the column of liquid
standing on the surface of the liquid is equal to the pressure exerted by air on
the rest of the surface of the liquid, then the height of the column of liquid is
a measure of atmospheric pressure. Because water is 13.6 times less dense than

T

V

Answers to Selected Exercises
c.

d.

T

P

V

V
e.

f.

P
PV
T
1/V

P
97. 0.772 atm  L; In Sample Exercise 5.3, 1.0 mol of gas was present at 0C.
The moles of gas and/or the temperature must have been different for Boyle’s
data. 99. MnCl4 101. 1490 103. 24 torr 105. 4.1  106 L air; 7.42 
105 L H2 107. 490 atm 109. 13.3% N 111. C12H21NO; C24H42N2O2
113. C3H8 should have the largest b constant. Since CO2 has the largest a constant, CO2 will have the strongest intermolecular attractions. 115. 13.4%
CaO, 86.6% BaO 117. C2H6 119. a. 8.7  103 L air/min; b. xCO 
0.0017, xCO2  0.032, xO2  0.13, xN2  0.77, xH2O  0.067 121. a. 1.01
 104 g; b. 6.65  104 g; c. 8.7  103 g 123. a. Due to air’s larger average molar mass, a given volume of air at a given set of conditions has a higher
density than helium. We need to heat the air to greater than 25C to lower the
air density (by driving air out of the hot-air balloon) until the density is the
same as that for helium (at 25C and 1.00 atm). b. 2150 K 125. a. 0.19 torr;
b. 6.6  1015 molecules CO/cm3 127. 0.023 mol 129. 4.8 g/L; UF3 will
effuse 1.02 times faster.

Chapter 6
9. Path-dependent functions for a trip from Chicago to Denver are those quantities that depend on the route taken. One can ﬂy directly from Chicago to
Denver or one could ﬂy from Chicago to Atlanta to Los Angeles and then to
Denver. Some path-dependent quantities are miles traveled, fuel consumption
of the airplane, time traveling, airplane snacks eaten, etc. State functions are
path-independent; they only depend on the initial and ﬁnal states. Some state
functions for an airplane trip from Chicago to Denver would be longitude
change, latitude change, elevation change, and overall time zone change.
11. Both q and w are negative.
13.
H2O1l2  12 CO2 1g2 S 12 CH4 1g2  O2 1g2
1
1
2 CH4 1g2  O2 1g2 S 2 CO2 1g2  H2O1g2
H2O1l2 S H2O1g2

¢H1  12 1891 kJ2
¢H2  12 1803 kJ2
¢H  ¢H1  ¢H2  44 kJ

15. Fossil fuels contain carbon; the incomplete combustion of fossil fuels produces CO(g) instead of CO2 1g2. This occurs when the amount of oxygen
reacting is not sufﬁcient to convert all of the carbon in fossil fuels to CO2.
Carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas to humans. 17. 150 J 19. 1.0 kg object with velocity of 2.0 m/s. 21. a. 41 kJ; b. 35 kJ; c. 47 kJ; d. part a
only 23. 375 J heat transferred to the system 25. 13.2 kJ 27. 11.0 L
29. q  30.9 kJ, w  12.4 kJ, E  18.5 kJ 31. This is an endothermic
reaction, so heat must be absorbed to convert reactants into products. The
high-temperature environment of internal combustion engines provides the
heat. 33. a. endothermic; b. exothermic; c. exothermic; d. endothermic
35. a. 1650 kJ; b. 826 kJ; c. 7.39 kJ; d. 34.4 kJ 37. 4400 g C3H8
39. When a liquid is converted into a gas, there is an increase in volume.

A45

The 2.5 kJ/mol quantity can be considered as the work done by the vaporization process in pushing back the atmosphere. 41. H2O(l); 2.30 
103 J; Hg(l); 140C 43. Al(s) 45. 311 K 47. 23.7C 49. 0.25 J/g  C
51. 66 kJ/mol 53. 39.2C 55. a. 31.5 kJ/C; b. 1.10  103 kJ/mol
57. 220.8 kJ 59. 1268 kJ; No, because this reaction is very endothermic,
it would not be a practical way of making ammonia due to the high energy
costs. 61. 233 kJ 63. 713 kJ 65. The enthalpy change for the formation of one mole of a compound from its elements, with all substances in
their standard states. Na(s)  12 Cl2(g) n NaCl(s); H2(g)  12 O2(g) n H2O(l);
6Cgraphite(s)  6H2(g)  3O2(g) n C6H12O6(s); Pb(s)  S(s)  2O2(g) n
PbSO4(s) 67. a. 940. kJ; b. 265 kJ; c. 176 kJ 69. a. 908 kJ,
112 kJ, 140. kJ; b. 12NH3(g)  21O2(g) n 8HNO3(aq)  4NO(g) 
14H2O(g), exothermic 71. 2677 kJ 73. 169 kJ/mol 75. 29.67 kJ/g
77. For C3H8(g), 50.37 kJ/g vs. 47.7 kJ/g for octane. Because of the low
boiling point of propane, there are extra safety hazards associated with using
the necessary high-pressure compressed gas tanks. 79. 1.05  105 L
81. a. 2SO2(g)  O2(g) n 2SO3(g); w  0; b. COCl2(g) n CO(g)  Cl2(g);
w  0; c. N2(g)  O2(g) n 2NO(g); w  0; Compare the sum of the
coefﬁcients of all the product gases in the balanced equation to the sum of
the coefﬁcients of all the reactant gases. When a balanced reaction has
more mol of product gases than mol of reactant gases, then the reaction will
expand in volume ( V is positive) and the system does work on the
surroundings (w  0). When a balanced reaction has a decrease in the mol
of gas from reactants to products, then the reaction will contract in volume
( V is negative) and the surroundings does compression work on the system
(w  0). When there is no change in the mol of gas from reactants to products, then V  0 and w  0. 83. 25 J 85. 4.2 kJ heat released 87. The
calculated H value will be less positive (smaller) than it should be.
89. 25.91C 91. a. 632 kJ; b. C2H2(g) 93. a. 361 kJ; b. 199 kJ;
c. 227 kJ; d. 112 kJ 95. a. C12H22O11(s)  12O2(g) n 12CO2(g) 
11H2O(l ); b. 5630 kJ; c. 5630 kJ 97. 37 m2 99. 1  104 steps 101.
56.9 kJ 103. 1.74 kJ 105. 3.3 cm

Chapter 7
15. The equations relating the terms are nl  c, E  hn, and E  hc l. From
the equations, wavelength and frequency are inversely related, photon energy
and frequency are directly related, and photon energy and wavelength are
inversely related. The unit of 1 Joule (J)  1 kg m2/s2. This is why you must
change mass units to kg when using the deBroglie equation. 17. Sample
Exercise 7.3 calculates the deBroglie wavelength of a ball and of an electron.
The ball has a wavelength on the order of 1034 m. This is incredibly short
and, as far as the wave-particle duality is concerned, the wave properties of
large objects are insigniﬁcant. The electron, with its tiny mass, also has a short
wavelength; on the order of 1010 m. However, this wavelength is signiﬁcant
as it is on the same order as the spacing between atoms in a typical crystal.
For very tiny objects like electrons, the wave properties are important. The
wave properties must be considered, along with the particle properties, when
hypothesizing about the electron motion in an atom. 19. For the radial probability distribution, the space around the hydrogen nucleus is cut up into a series of thin spherical shells. When the total probability of ﬁnding the electron
in each spherical shell is plotted versus the distance from the nucleus, we get
the radial probability distribution graph. The plot shows a steady increase with
distance from the nucleus, maximizes at a certain distance from the nucleus,
then shows a steady decrease. Even though it is likely to ﬁnd an electron near
the nucleus, the volume of the spherical shell close to the nucleus is tiny, resulting in a low radial probability. The maximum radial probability distribution occurs at a distance of 5.29  102 nm from the nucleus; the electron is
most likely to be found in the volume of the shell centered at this distance from
the nucleus. The 5.29  102 nm distance is the exact radius of innermost
1n  12 orbit in the Bohr model. 21. If one more electron is added to a halfﬁlled subshell, electron–electron repulsions will increase because two electrons
must now occupy the same atomic orbital. This may slightly decrease the
stability of the atom. Hence, half-ﬁlled subshells minimize electron–electron

A46

Answers to Selected Exercises

repulsions. 23. The valence electrons are strongly attracted to the nucleus for
elements with large ionization energies. One would expect these species to
readily accept another electron and have very exothermic electron afﬁnities.
The noble gases are an exception; they have a large ionization energy but an
endothermic electron afﬁnity. Noble gases have a stable arrangement of electrons. Adding an electron disrupts this stable arrangement, resulting in unfavorable electron afﬁnities. 25. For hydrogen, all orbitals with the same value
of n have the same energy. For polyatomic atoms/ions, the energy of the orbitals also depends on ᐉ. Because there are more nondegenerate energy levels
for polyatomic atoms/ions as compared with hydrogen, there are many
more possible electronic transitions resulting in more complicated line spectra. 27. Yes, the maximum number of unpaired electrons in any conﬁguration corresponds to a minimum in electron–electron repulsions. 29. Ionization energy applies to the removal of the electron from the atom in the gas
phase. The work function applies to the removal of an electron from the
solid. 31. 4.5  1014 s1 33. 3.0  1010 s1, 2.0  1023 J/photon, 12 J/mol
35. Wave a has the longer wavelength (4.0  104 m). Wave b has the higher frequency (1.5  1012 s1) and larger photon energy (9.9  1022 J). Since both
of these waves represent electromagnetic radiation, they both should travel at
the same speed, c, the speed of light. Both waves represent infrared radiation.
37. 1.50  1023 atoms 39. 427.7 nm 41. a. 2.4  1011 m; b. 3.4  1034
m 43. 1.6  1027 kg 45. a. 656.7 nm (visible); b. 486.4 nm (visible);
c. 121.6 nm (ultraviolet)
47.

4
3

a

b

2
E
c

1
49. n  1 n n  5, ␭  95.00 nm; n  2 n n  6, ␭  410.4 nm; visible
light has sufﬁcient energy for the n  2 n n  6 transition but does not have
sufﬁcient energy for the n  1 n n  5 transition. 51. n  1, 91.20 nm;
n  2, 364.8 nm 53. n  2 55. a. 5.79  104 m; b. 3.64  1033 m;
c. The diameter of an H atom is roughly 1.0  108 cm. The uncertainty in
position is much larger than the size of the atom. d. The uncertainty is
insigniﬁcant compared to the size of a baseball. 57. n  1, 2, 3, . . . ; ᐉ  0,
1, 2, . . . (n  1); mᐉ  ᐉ, . . . , 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, . . . , ᐉ. 59. b. For
/  3, m/ can range from 3 to 3; thus 4 is not allowed. c. n cannot
equal zero. d. / cannot be a negative number. 61. ␺ 2 gives the probability
of ﬁnding the electron at that point. 63. 3; 1; 5; 25; 16 65. a. 32; b. 8;
c. 25; d. 10; e. 6
67. a.
or
1s

2s

2p

3s

3s

1s

2s

2p

3
3s

3p

3
3s

3p

b.

or
4s

3d

c.
1s

4s

2s

2p

3d

4p

69. Si: 1s22s22p63s23p2 or [Ne]3s23p2; Ga: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p1 or
[Ar]4s23d104p1; As: [Ar]4s23d104p3; Ge: [Ar]4s23d104p2; Al: [Ne]3s23p1; Cd:
[Kr]5s24d10; S: [Ne]3s23p4; Se: [Ar]4s23d104p4 71. Sc: 1s22s22p63s23p6
4s23d1; Fe: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d 6; P:1s22s22p63s23p3; Cs: 1s22s22p63s23p6
4s23d104p65s24d105p66s1; Eu: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f 65d1
(Actual: [Xe]6s24f 7); Pt: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f 145d 8
(Actual:
[Xe]6s14f 145d 9);
Xe:
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p6;
Br: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p5; 73. a. I: [Kr]5s24d105p5; b. element 120:
[Rn]7s25f 146d107p68s2; c. Rn: [Xe]6s24f 145d106p6; d. Cr: [Ar]4s13d 5 75. a. 18;
b. 30; c. 10; d. 40
77. B: 1s22s22p1
n
ᐉ

mᐉ

ms

N: 1s22s22p3
n
ᐉ
mᐉ

ms

1s

1

0

0

12

1s

1

0

0

1s

1

0

0

12

12

1s

1

0

0

12
12
12

12

2s

2

0

0

12

2s

2

0

0

12

2p

2

1

1

12

2p

2

1

0

12

2p

2

1

1

12

2s

2

0

0

2s

2

0

0

2p

2

1

1

For boron, there are six possibilities for the 2p electron. For nitrogen, all the
1
2p electrons could have ms  2. 79. none; an excited state; energy released 81. C, O, Si, S, Ti, Ni, Ge, Se 83. Li (1 unpaired electron), N (3 unpaired electrons), Ni (2 unpaired electrons), and Te (2 unpaired electrons) are
all expected to be paramagnetic because they have unpaired electrons.
85. a. S  Se  Te; b. Br  Ni;  K; c. F  Si  Ba 87. a. Te  Se 
S; b. K  Ni  Br; c. Ba  Si  F 89. a. He; b. Cl; c. element 117;
d. Si; e. Na 91. a. [Rn]7s25f 146d4; b. W; c. SgO3 and SgO42 probably
would form (similar to Cr). 93. Se is an exception to the general ionization
trend. There are extra electron–electron repulsions in Se because two electrons
are in the same 4p orbital, resulting in a lower ionization energy than expected.
95. a. C, Br; b. N, Ar; c. C, Br 97. Al (44), Si (120), P (74),
S (200.4), Cl (348.7); Based on the increasing nuclear charge, we would
expect the electron afﬁnity (EA) values to become more exothermic as we go
from left to right in the period. Phosphorus is out of line. The reaction for the
EA of P is
P1g2  e S P 1g2

[Ne]3s23p3

[Ne]3s23p4

The additional electron in P will have to go into an orbital that already
has one electron. There will be greater repulsions between the paired electrons in P, causing the EA of P to be less favorable than predicted based solely
on attractions to the nucleus. 99. a. I  Br  F  Cl; b. N  O  F
101. a. Se3 1g2 S Se4 1g2  e; b. S 1g2  e S S2 1g2; c. Fe3 1g2 
e  S Fe2 1g2 ; d. Mg1g2 S Mg  1g2  e  103. potassium peroxide, K2O2;
K2 unstable 105. 6.582  1014 s1; 4.361  1019 J 107. Yes; the ionization
energy general trend decreases down a group and the atomic radius trend
increases down a group. The data in Table 7.8 conﬁrm both of these general
trends. 109. a. 6Li1s2  N2 1g2 S 2Li3N1s2 ; b. 2Rb1s2  S1s2 S Rb2S1s2
111. 386 nm 113. 200 s 115. ␭  4.104  105 cm so violet light is
emitted. 117. a. true for H only; b. true for all atoms; c. true for all atoms
119. When the p and d orbital functions are evaluated at various points in
space, the results sometimes have positive values and sometimes have negative values. The term phase is often associated with the  and  signs. For
example, a sine wave has alternating positive and negative phases. This is
analogous to the positive and negative values (phases) in the p and d orbitals.
121. The element with the smallest ﬁrst ionization energy (I1) is Al (the green
plot), the next highest I1 belongs to Mg (the blue plot), and Si has the largest
I1 (the red plot). Mg is the element with the huge jump between I2 and I3; it has
two valence electrons so the third electron removed is an inner-core electron.
Inner-core electrons are always much more difﬁcult to remove as compared
to valence electrons because they are closer to the nucleus, on average, as

Answers to Selected Exercises
compared to the valence electrons. 123. Valence electrons are easier to remove
than inner-core electrons. The large difference in energy between I2 and I3 indicates that this element has two valence electrons. The element is
most likely an alkaline earth metal because alkaline earth metals have two
valence electrons. 125. a. 146 kJ; b. 407 kJ; c. 1117 kJ; d. 1524 kJ
127. a. line A, n  6 to n  3; line B, n  5 to n  3; b. 121.6 nm
129. For r  a0 and ␪  0, ␺ 2  2.46  1028. For r  a0 and ␪  90, ␺2  0.
As expected, the xy plane is a node for the 2pz, atomic orbital.
131. a.

1
2
3
4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

b. 2, 4, 12, and 20; c. There are many possibilities. One example of each formula is XY  1  11, XY2  6  11, X2Y  1  10, XY3  7  11, and
X2Y3  7  10; d. 6; e. 0; f. 18 133. The ratios for Mg, Si, P, Cl, and Ar
are about the same. However, the ratios for Na, Al, and S are higher. For Na,
the second IE is extremely high because the electron is taken from n  2 (the
ﬁrst electron is taken from n  3). For Al, the ﬁrst electron requires a bit less
energy than expected by the trend due to the fact it is a 3p electron. For S, the
ﬁrst electron requires a bit less energy than expected by the trend due to electrons being paired in one of the p orbitals. 135. a. As we remove succeeding electrons, the electron being removed is closer to the nucleus and there are
fewer electrons left repelling it. The remaining electrons are more strongly
attracted to the nucleus and it takes more energy to remove these electrons.
b. For I4, we begin removing an electron with n  2. For I3, we removed an electron with n  3. In going from n  3 to n  2 there is a big jump in ionization
energy because the n  2 electrons (inner core) are much closer to the nucleus
on the average than the n  3 electrons (valence electrons). Since the n  2
electrons are closer to the nucleus, they are held more tightly and require a much
larger amount of energy to remove them. c. Al4; the electron afﬁnity for Al4
is H for the reaction
Al4 1g2  e ¡ Al3 1g2

21. 0

Al4 6 Al3 6 Al2 6 Al  6 Al
137. Solving for the molar mass of the element gives 40.2 g/mol; this is calcium. 139. a. Fr  [Rn]7s1, Fr  [Rn]; b. 7.7  1022 Fr atoms; c. 2.27790
 1022 g

Chapter 8
13. (NH4)2SO4 and Ca3(PO4)2 are compounds with both ionic and covalent
bonds. 15. Electronegativity increases left to right across the periodic table
and decreases from top to bottom. Hydrogen has an electronegativity value between B and C in the second row, and identical to P in the third row. Going
further down the periodic table, H has an electronegativity value between As
and Se (row 4) and identical to Te (row 5). It is important to know where hydrogen ﬁts into the electronegativity trend, especially for rows 2 and 3. If you
know where H ﬁts into the trend, then you can predict bond dipole directions
for nonmetals bonded to hydrogen. 17. For ions, concentrate on the number
of protons and the number of electrons present. The species whose nucleus
holds the electrons most tightly will be smallest. For example, compare the
size of an anion to the neutral atom. The anion has more electrons held by the
same number of protons in the nucleus. These electrons will not be held as
tightly, resulting in a bigger size for the anion as compared to the neutral atom.
For isoelectronic ions, the same number of electrons are held by different
numbers of protons in the various ions. The ion with the most protons holds
the electrons tightest and has smallest size. 19. Fossil fuels contain a lot
of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Combustion of fossil fuels (reaction with O2 2
produces CO2 and H2O. Both these compounds have very strong bonds.
Because strong bonds are formed, combustion reactions are very exothermic.

1

0

0 1

1

0 1

O C OO
O P C PO mn O O C qO mn O P
The formal charges are shown above the atoms in the three Lewis structures.
The best Lewis structure for CO2, from a formal charge standpoint, is the ﬁrst
structure with each oxygen double bonded to carbon. This structure has a formal charge of zero on all atoms (which is preferred). The other two resonance
structures have nonzero formal charges on the oxygens, making them less reasonable. For CO2, we usually ignore the last two resonance structures and think
of the ﬁrst structure as the true Lewis structure for CO2. 23. a. C  N  O;
b. Se  S  Cl; c. Sn  Ge  Si; d. Tl  Ge  S 25. a. GeOF; b. POCl;
c. SOF; d. TiOCl 27. Order of electronegativity from Fig. 8.3: a. C(2.5)
 N (3.0)  O (3.5), same; b. Se (2.4)  S (2.5)  Cl (3.0), same; c. Si 
Ge  Sn (1.8), different; d. Tl (1.8)  Ge (1.8)  S (2.5), different. Most
polar bonds using actual electronegativity values: a. SiOF and GeOF
equal polarity (Ge—F predicted); b. POCl (same as predicted); c. SOF (same
as predicted); d. TiOCl (same as predicted) 29. Incorrect: b, d, e;
b. dCl¬Id; d. nonpolar bond so no dipole moment; e. dO¬Pd
31. FOH  OOH  NOH  COH  POH 33. Fr: [Xe]6s24f 145d106p6;
Be2: ls2; P3 and Cl: [Ne]3s23p6; Se2: [Ar]4s23d104p6 35. a. Sc3;
b. Te2; c. Ce4, Ti4; d. Ba2 37. Sb3, Te2, I, Cs, Ba2, and La3
are some possibilities. La3  Ba2  Cs  I  Te2  Sb3
39. a. Cu  Cu  Cu2; b. Pt2  Pd2  Ni2; c. O2  O  O;
d. La3  Eu3  Gd3  Yb3; e. Te2  I  Cs  Ba2  La3
41. a. Al2S3, aluminum sulﬁde; b. K3N1, Potassium nitride; c. MgCl2, Magnesium chloride; d. CsBr, Cesium bromide 43. a. NaCl, Na smaller than K;
b. LiF, F smaller than Cl; c. MgO, O2 greater charge than OH; d. Fe(OH)3,
2
Fe3 greater charge than Fe ; e. Na2O, O2 greater charge than Cl; f. MgO,
2
2
Mg smaller than Ba , and O2 smaller than S2. 45. 437 kJ/mol 47. The

lattice energy for Mg2O2 will be much more exothermic than for Mg O.
2

2
49. 181 kJ/mol 51. Ca has greater charge than Na , and Se is smaller than
Te2. Charge differences affect lattice energy values more than size differences,
and we expect the trend from most exothermic to least exothermic to be:


CaSe

¢H  I4  11,600 kJ/mol

d. The greater the number of electrons, the greater the size. So

0

A47

(2862)



CaTe

Na2Se

(2721)



(2130)

Na2Te
(2095)

53. a. 183 kJ; b. 109 kJ 55. 42 kJ 57. 1276 kJ 59. 295 kJ
61. 485 kJ/mol 63. a. Using standard enthalpies of formation, H° 
184 kJ vs. 183 kJ from bond energies; b. Using standard enthalpies of
formation, H  92 kJ vs. 109 kJ from bond energies. Bond energies give
a reasonably good estimate for H, especially when all reactants and products
are gases. 65. a. Using SF4 data: DSF  342.5 kJ/mol. Using SF6 data: DSF 
327.0 kJ/mol. b. The SOF bond energy in the table is 327 kJ/mol. The value
in the table was based on the SOF bond in SF6. c. S(g) and F(g) are not the
most stable forms of the elements at 25°C. The most stable forms are S8(s) and
F2(g); H°f  0 for these two species.

POH
b. H Oš

67. a. H O Cq N ð

d.

H
A
HO N OH
A
H

A
H

+

š
š
g. O

 PC PO
69. HOBeOH

D G

š š
h. O
 PO

H
B

H

B
C

H

H

H
A
š
š O C O Cl
ð Cl
 A ð
ð Cl
ð

š OF
š
F O Se
f. ð š

 ð

ð Oð

e.

c.

H
šð
i. H O Br


A48

Answers to Selected Exercises

71.

F
PF5

75.

F
F

P
F
F

F
SF4

F

H
H
A
A
H H KC H E H
H H EC N E H
C
C
C
C
A
B
B
A
mn
ECH KCH
ECN ECH
C
C
H
H
H
H
A
A
H
H

S
77. With resonance all carbon–carbon bonds are equivalent (we indicate this
with a circle in the ring), giving three different structures:

F
F

Cl

F
ClF3

Cl

Cl

Cl

Cl
F

F

–
73. a. NO2

NO3–

Cl

–

Br O Br O Br

Br3

šPš
š
O
Oð
 NO 

D

š š
ðš
O

ON P O

–

šð
ðY

A

š O XO Y
šð
ðY
A
š
š
ðY ð

mn

G
O½ý

ð

ý½O

mn

–

ðOð

B
N

–

Localized double bonds give four unique structures.
79. N2 (triple bond)  N2F2 (double bond)  N2F4 (single bond)
81. a.–f. and h. all have similar Lewis structures:

ð

_

Cl

–

ð Oð

A
N

mn

J G
Oý½

D

ý½O 

ýO

A
N

–
g. ClO3

–

ðOð







ðO
 O Cl O O
ð

š

–

A

ðO
ð

M
Oý

Formal charges: a. 1; b. 2; c. 3; d. 1; e. 2; f. 4; g. 2; h. 1
83.

F

O

O

F

Formal charge:
0 0 0 0
Oxidation number: 1 1 1 1

N2O4

O

O
N

O

N

O

O
N

O

Oxidation numbers are more useful. We are forced to assign 1 as the oxidation number for oxygen. Oxygen is very electronegative and 1 is not a stable oxidation state for this element.

N
O

O

85. Cl

O
N

O

O

O

O

N

O

O
N

N
O

b.
–

–

–

–

–

–

OCN– ð š
O O C q N ð f f ý½O P C PNk

SCN–

ðš
S O C q N ð f f ý½ S P C PNk


N3–

ðš
N O N q N ð f f ý½N P N P Nk


–

f f ðOq C O š
Nð ;

–

87. [67] a. linear, 180; b. trigonal pyramid, 109.5; c. tetrahedral,
109.5; d. tetrahedral, 109.5; e. trigonal planar, 120; f. V-shaped, 109.5;
g. linear, 180; h. and i. linear, no bond angle in diatomic molecules; [73]
a. NO2: V-shaped, 120; NO3: trigonal planar, 120; N2O4: trigonal planar about both N atoms, 120; b. all are linear, 180 89. Br3: linear; ClF3;
T-shaped; SF4: see-saw 91. a. trigonal planar; 120; b. V-shaped; 120
93. a. linear; 180; b. T-shaped; 90; c. see-saw; 90 and 120;
d. trigonal bipyramid; 90 and 120 95. SeO2 (bond dipoles do not cancel
each other out in SeO2) 97. ICl3 and TeF4 (bond dipoles do not cancel each
other out in ICl3 and TeF4)
99. a. OCl2

š
f f ð S q C O
Nð ;
š
f f ð Nq N O N
ð

S S Cl

–

KrF2

ýClk
D G
ýO
½ 
½Ok

š
k š
ð
F OýKr
Fð
 O

V-shaped, polar

Linear, nonpolar

Answers to Selected Exercises
HOBeOH

Linear, nonpolar

SO2

š
S
J
ý O GO k
 ½ 

V-shaped, polar

(one other resonance structure possible)

ð Oð

b. SO3

B
S
ýOD GO k
½  ½ 

Trigonal planar, nonpolar

(Two other resonance structures possible)

structure that obeys the octet rule for SO4 (30 electrons), unlike XeO4 (32 electrons). d. SeF4: Both compounds require the central atom to expand its octet.
O is too small and doesn’t have low-energy d orbitals to expand its octet (which
is true for all row 2 elements). 111. a. Both have one or more 180 bond angles; both are made up entirely of Xe and Cl; both have the individual bond
dipoles arranged so they cancel each other (both are nonpolar); both have lone
pairs on the central Xe atom; both have a central Xe atom that has more than
8 electrons around it. b. All have lone pairs on the central atom; all have a
net dipole moment (all are polar). 113. Yes, each structure has the same number of effective pairs around the central atom. (We count a multiple bond as a
single group of electrons.)
115.

 
ð
ð Fð
ð
F F
G A D



Trigonal pyramid, polar

F
IF3

I

T-shaped, polar

F

F
ðš
Fð

SeF4

A
CH
E
š
š
ð
F A 
Fð
Fð
ð
  
ð
FO Se O
Fð
D G
ð
F ð ð
Fð

F
F

d. IF5

AsF5

See-saw, polar

F
Kr

KrF4

Tetrahedral, nonpolar

Square planar, nonpolar



ðF ð
ð
F A

G
Fð
DAs O
A
ð
F ðFð


The lone pair of electrons around Te exerts a stronger repulsion than the bonding pairs. The stronger repulsion pushes the four square planner F atoms away
from the lone pair, reducing the bond angles between the axial F atom and the
square planar F atoms. 117. 17 kJ/mol 119. See Fig. 8.11 to see the data
supporting MgO as an ionic compound. Note that the lattice energy is large
enough to evercome all of the other processes (removing 2 electrons from Mg,
and so on). The bond energy for O2 (247 kJ/mol) and electron afﬁnity
(737 kJ/mol) are the same when making CO. However, the energy needed to
ionize carbon to form a C2 ion must be too large. Figure 7.30 shows that the
ﬁrst ionization energy for carbon is about 400 kJ/mol greater than the ﬁrst IE
for magnesium. If all other numbers were equal, the overall energy change
would be 200 kJ/mol (see Fig. 8.11). It is not unreasonable to assume that
the second ionization energy for carbon is more than 200 kJ/mol greater than
the second ionization energy of magnesium. 121. As the halogen atoms get
larger, it becomes more difﬁcult to ﬁt three halogen atoms around the small
nitrogen atom, and the NX3 molecule becomes less stable. 123. reaction i:
2636 kJ; reaction ii: 3471 kJ; reaction iii: 3543 kJ; Reaction iii yields
the most energy per kg (8085 kJ/kg)
125.

F

ðš
F ð
š
ð
F A ðš
F
D D
I
GGš
š
ð
F
Fð


Te

H ðOð
H ð Oð
ýO
GýOk
 
 
A
A
ý
ý
mn H O C O C O O
HO CO COO
OO
 ON G
OO
 ON
A
A
k
k
O
O
H
H
k ý
k

P

c. CF4

G  D
ð
F
Fð


P

E NH

š
š
ð
F A 
Fð
ð
Fð

P

NF3

–

P

BeH2

A49

Square pyramid, polar

Trigonal bipyramid, nonpolar



H ð Oð
GýOk
A A  
ý
mn H O C O C P O O O PN
G k
A
O
H
k ý

127. a. Two possible structures exist; each has a T-shaped molecular structure:

F
Br

101. Element E is a halogen (F, Cl, Br, or I); trigonal pyramid; 109.5
103. The polar bonds are symmetrically arranged about the central atoms, and
all the individual bond dipoles cancel to give no net dipole moment for each
molecule, i.e., the molecules are nonpolar. 105. a. radius: N  N 
N; I.E. N  N  N; b. radius: Cl  Cl  Se  Se; I.E.
Se  Se  Cl  Cl; c. radius: Sr2  Rb  Br; I.E. Br 
Rb  Sr2; 107. a. 1549 kJ; b. 1390. kJ c. 1312 kJ; d. 1599 kJ
109. a. NaBr: In NaBr2, the sodium ion would have a 2 charge assuming
each bromine has a 1 charge. Sodium doesn’t form stable Na2 compounds.
b. ClO4: ClO4 has 31 valence electrons so it is impossible to satisfy the octet
rule for all atoms in ClO4. The extra electron from the 1 charge in ClO4
allows for complete octets for all atoms. c. XeO4: We can’t draw a Lewis

(This form is not important
by formal charge arguments.)

I
I

Br

I

F

I

90 bond angle between I atoms

180 bond angle between I atoms

b. Three possible structures exist; each has a see-saw molecular structure.

O

O

F

Xe
F

F

90 bond angle
between O atoms

O

O

Xe
F

O

180 bond angle
between O atoms

F
Xe

O

F

120 bond angle
between O atoms

A50

Answers to Selected Exercises

c. Three possible structures exist; each has a square pyramid molecular
structure.

Cl

F



Cl

Cl

Te
Cl



F

F

Te
F

Cl

One F atom is 180
from lone pair.
129.

Cl

H0

Cl



Cl

Te
F

Both F atoms are 90
from lone pair and 90
from each other.

Cl

H2O has a tetrahedral arrangement of the electron pairs about the O atom that
requires sp3 hybridization. Two of the sp3 hybrid orbitals are used to form bonds
to the two hydrogen atoms, and the other two sp3 hybrid orbitals hold the two
lone pairs on oxygen.
17. H2COð

ðO ð

F

Both F atoms are 90
from lone pair and 180
from each other.

131. X is iodine; square pyramid 133. Cr  As  P  Cl

Chapter 9

H

B
C
D D

The central carbon atom has a trigonal planar arrangement of the electron pairs
that requires sp2 hybridization. Two of the sp2 hybrid orbitals are used to form
the two bonds to hydrogen. The other sp2 hybrid orbital forms the ␴ bond to
oxygen. The unchanged (unhybridized) p orbital on carbon is used to form the
␲ bond between carbon and oxygen.
19. Ethane:

7. In hybrid orbital theory, some or all of the valence atomic orbitals of the
central atom in a molecule are mixed together to form hybrid orbitals; these
hybrid orbitals point to where the bonded atoms and lone pairs are oriented.
The ␴ bonds are formed from the hybrid orbitals overlapping head to head with
an appropriate orbital on the bonded atom. The ␲ bonds in hybrid orbital
theory are formed from unhybridized p atomic orbitals. The p orbitals overlap
side to side to form the p bond where the p electrons occupy the space above
and below a line joining the atoms p the internuclear axis). Assuming the z-axis
is the internuclear axis, then the pz atomic orbital will always be hybridized
whether the hybridization is sp, sp2, sp3, dsp2 or d 2sp3. For sp hybridization,
the px and py atomic orbitals are unhybridized; they are used to form two p
bonds to the bonded atom(s). For sp2 hybridization, either the px or py atomic
orbital is hybridized (along with the s and pz orbitals); the other p orbital is
used to form a p bond to a bonded atom. For sp3 hybridization, the s and all
of the p orbitals are hybridized; no unhybridized p atomic orbitals are present,
so typical p bonds do not form with sp3 hybridization. For dsp3 and d2sp3
hybridization, we just mix in one or two d orbitals into the hybridization
process. Which speciﬁc d orbitals are used is not important to our discussion.
9. We use d orbitals when we have to; i.e., we use d orbitals when the central
atom on a molecule has more than eight electrons around it. The d orbitals are
necessary to accommodate the electrons over eight. Row 2 elements never have
more than eight electrons around them so they never hybridize d orbitals. We
rationalize this by saying there are no d orbitals close in energy to the valence
2s and 2p orbitals (2d orbitals are forbidden energy levels). However, for row
3 and heavier elements, there are 3d, 4d, 5d, etc. orbitals which will be close
in energy to the valence s and p orbitals. It is row 3 and heavier nonmetals that
hybridize d orbitals when they have to. For sulfur, the valence electrons are in
3s and 3p orbitals. Therefore, 3d orbitals are closest in energy and are available for hybridization. Arsenic would hybridize 4d orbitals to go with the
valence 4s and 4p orbitals while iodine would hybridize 5d orbitals since the
valence electrons are in n  5. 11. Bonding and antibonding molecular
orbitals are both solutions to the quantum mechanical treatment of the molecule. Bonding orbitals form when in phase orbitals combine to give constructive interference. This results in enhanced electron probability located between
the two nuclei. The end result is that a bonding MO is lower in energy than
the atomic orbitals of which it is composed. Antibonding orbitals form when
out-of-phase orbitals combine. The mismatched phases produce destructive
interference leading to a node in the electron probability between the two nuclei.
With electron distribution pushed to the outside, the energy of an antibonding
orbital is higher than the energy of the atomic orbitals of which it is composed.
13. The localized electron model does not deal effectively with molecules
containing unpaired electrons. We can draw all of the possible resonance structures for NO, but still not have a good feel for whether the bond in NO is
weaker or stronger than the bond in NO. MO theory can handle odd electron
species without any modiﬁcations. In addition, hybrid orbital theory does not
predict that NO is paramagnetic. The MO theory correctly makes this
prediction.
15.
ý k

H2Oð

H

O
D D

H

H

H
H
H

C

C

H

H

H
The carbon atoms are sp3 hybridized. The six COH bonds are formed from
the sp3 hybrid orbitals on C with the 1s atomic orbitals from the hydrogen
atoms. The carbon–carbon bond is formed from an sp3 hybrid orbital on each
C atom.
Ethanol:
H H

H

C

C

H

H

O

H

The two C atoms and the O atom are all sp3 hybridized. All bonds are formed
from these sp3 hybrid orbitals. The COH and OOH bonds form from sp3 hybrid orbitals and the 1s atomic orbitals from the hydrogen atom. The COC
and COO bonds are formed from sp3 hybrid orbitals on each atom. 21. [67]
a. sp; b. sp3; c. sp3; d. sp3; e. sp2; f. sp3; g. sp; h. each O is sp2 hybridized; i. Br is sp3 hybridized [73] a. NO2, sp2; NO3, sp2; N2O4: both N
atoms are sp2 hybridized; b. All are sp hybridized. 23. All exhibit dsp3
hybridization. 25. The molecules in Exercise 91 all exhibit sp2 hybridization
about the central atom; the molecules in Exercise 92 all exhibit sp3
hybridization about the central atom. 27. a. tetrahedral, 109.5°, sp3, nonpolar


ðF ð

A

EC H
ð
F A 
Fð
ð
Fð
b. trigonal pyramid, 109.5°, sp3, polar

 
ð
F ON 
D G
ð
Fð
Fð

c. V-shaped, 109.5°, sp3, polar

ýO k
D
G k
ð
F
F
k ý
d. trigonal planar, 120°, sp2, nonpolar


ðF ð

A
B

kFD GFk
k ý k ý
e. linear, 180°, sp, nonpolar
HOBeOH

A51

Answers to Selected Exercises
a  120°, see-saw, dsp3, polar
b  90°

f

f f


ð ð
F
ð
Fb A
H
aE Te ð
ð
F A
ð
Fð

f

f.





f

f

g. ð F ð F ð
G Af a 
b As O
Fð


it comes a pi bonding orbital, which changes the bond order from 3 to
2.5 (the bond weakens). 41. N2 and N2 43. a. (␴2s)2(␴2s*)2(␲2p)4(␴2p)2;
B.O.  3; diamagnetic; b. (␴2s)2(␴2s*)2 (␲2p)4(␴2p)1; B.O.  2.5; paramagnetic; c. (␴2s)2(␴2s*)2(␲2p)4; B.O.  2; diamagnetic; bond length: CO  CO
 CO2; bond energy: CO2  CO  CO 45. H2; B2; C22
47.

a  90°, trigonal bipyramid, dsp3, nonpolar
b  120°

f

DA

ð
F ðFð






k Fð
F OýKr
h. ð
 O
i.


ðF ð
 D 
ð
F O Kr
Fð
 O

linear, 180°, dsp3, nonpolar
square planar, 90°, d 2sp3, nonpolar

D

ð
Fð

j.

 
ð Fð Fð

A D 
ð
FO
O
Se
OO
Fð
D A
ð
F ð Fð


k.

F

F

l.

F

I
F

octahedral, 90°, d 2sp3, nonpolar



 KOH ½ mn ½ HOK 
O
½O
 O½
O

F
I

F

49. a. The electrons would be closer to F on the average. The
F atom is more electronegative than the H atom, and the 2p orbital of F is lower
in energy than the 1s orbital of H; b. The bonding MO would have more ﬂuorine 2p character because it is closer in energy to the ﬂuorine 2p orbital;
c. The antibonding MO would place more electron density closer to H and
would have a greater contribution from the higher-energy hydrogen 1s atomic
orbital. 51. O3 and NO2 have identical Lewis structures, so we need to
discuss only one of them. The Lewis structure for O3 is

F

F

square pyramid, 90°;
T-shaped, 90°;
d 2sp3, polar
dsp3, polar
29. The ␲ bond forces all six atoms into the same plane. 31. Biacetyl

Localized electron model: The central oxygen atom is sp2 hybridized, which is
used to form the two ␴ bonds and hold the lone pair of electrons. An unchanged
(unhybridized) p atomic orbital forms the ␲ bond with the neighboring oxygen
atoms. The ␲ bond resonates between the two positions. Molecular orbital
model: There are two localized ␴ bonds and a ␲ bond that is delocalized over
the entire surface of the molecule. The delocalized ␲ bond results from overlap of a p atomic oribtal on each oxygen atom in O3.
53. a. Trigonal pyramid; sp3

Xe

ý Ok

H B
Oð
A E C H Kš
O
H C sp3 C
A
A
H HO COH
A
H

O

sp2

h

h

h

O
O

b. Tetrahedral; sp3

h

All CCO angles are 120°. The six atoms are not in the same plane. 11␴ and 2␲
Acetoin
sp

2

O
Xe
O
c. Square pyramid; d2sp3

ýOk

F

O

F

Xe

E

f

f

f

H H Bf a
H
A A EC E
CE
HO C O C
A Af b 3 A H
H ðO ð sp H
G
H
sp3

O
O

F

F
or

F

F

F

Xe
F

O

h

f

f

angle a  120°, angle b  109.5°, 13 ␴ and 1 ␲ bond 33. To complete the
Lewis structure, add lone pairs to complete octets for each atom. a. 6;
b. 4; c. The center N in ONPNPN group; d. 33 ␴ ; e. 5 ␲ ; f. 180°;
g. 109.5°; h. sp3 35. a. H2, H2, H2; b. He22 and He2 37. a. (␴2s)2;
B.O.  1; diamagnetic (0 unpaired electrons); b. (␴2s)2(␴2s*)2(␲2p)4; B.O. 
2; diamagnetic (0 unpaired electrons); c. (␴3s)2(␴3s*)2(␴3p)2(␲3p)4(␲3p*)2;
B.O.  2; paramagnetic (2 unpaired electrons) 39. When O2 loses an electron, it comes from a pi antibonding orbital, which strengthens the bond
from a bond order of 2 to a bond order of 2.5. When N2 loses an electron,

d. T-shaped; dsp3

O

F
O

Xe

or

F

F
e. Trigonal bipyramid; dsp

O

F

F

3

F
Xe

O

O
O

Xe

or

F
Xe

O

O

F
F

or

O
Xe

O

O

F

A52

Answers to Selected Exercises

55.

O
C

H H

H
O
C
H
H

C

C

C

O

H

C

mn

H
C

C

H

N
H

O
C

H H

H
O
C
H
H

C

C

H

H
C

C

C

O

C
H

N
H

a. 21 ␴ bonds; 4 ␲ bonds (The electrons in the 3 ␲ bonds in the ring are
delocalized.) b. angles a, c, and g: 109.5; angles b, d, e, and f: 120;
c. 6 sp2 carbons; d. 4 sp3 atoms; e. Yes, the ␲ electrons in the ring are
delocalized. The atoms in the ring are all sp2 hybridized. This leaves a p orbital perpendicular to the plane of the ring from each atom. Overlap of all six
of these p orbitals results in a ␲ molecular orbital system where the electrons
are delocalized above and below the plane of the ring (similar to benzene in
Fig. 9.48 of the text). 57. 267 kJ/mol; this amount of energy must be supplied
to break the ␲ bond.
59. a.

Trigonal planar, nonpolar, 120, sp2

H


½
D N P NG
ð
F
Fð


D

ð
Fð

Polar

H

0 DNG

+1

Trigonal planar about all C atoms,
nonpolar, 120, sp2

H
C

C

C
H

H


ð Cl ð

0

0

½

Favored
by formal
charge

H
A
HO 
N

H

A

NO H
NO H
H O
N
N
N
G E N DA
G N E DA
C
C H
C
C H
A
B
B
A
mn
N
N
N
N
½ H K 
½ K H 
C
C
A
A
HO Nð
H N
A
H
H




b. NCN2: C is sp hybridized. Each resonance structure predicts a different hybridization for the N atoms. For the remaining compounds, we will predict hybrids for the favored resonance structures only.

A 
ý IO Clð
½

A

ð Cl
ð
T-shaped, polar, 90°, dsp3



G ½

sp

NH2
G m 3
sp
D m
sp2 ½ NH2

ð N q C O NP C

m

sp

m
m

D
H sp3



m

N O C q Nð
m
m



b. ý
ý
 ð mn ð N
 O N q Oð
½ N P N P O½ mn ð N q NO O
–1 +1 0
0 +1 –1
–2 +1 +1 Formal
charges

H

m

61. a. The NNO structure is correct. From the Lewis structures we would predict both NNO and NON to be linear, but NON would be nonpolar. NNO is
polar.



0

mn ð Nq C ON 0 
0
N
C ON O H
0½ N O H
0D
A
A
ðN
H
H
D G
H
H
H

Melamine:

Nonpolar

H
C

0

NPN

These are distinctly different molecules.

H

2–

Dicyandiamide:

ð Fð
G

V-shaped about both N atoms, 120°, sp2

c.



mn ð 
N O C q Nð

H +1 0 –1
H 0 0 0
G
G
N P C P N k mn
N O C q Nð
D
D 
H
H





2–

Favored by formal charge

–1

can also be

d. ICl3

mn ð N q C O
Nð

ý NP C P N P C
½
G

H

b. N2F2

H

H2NCN:



2–

ý NP C P N ý
½
½

0D

B
H

The central N is sp hybridized. We can probably ignore the third resonance
structure on the basis of formal charge. c. sp hybrid orbitals on the center N
overlap with atomic orbitals (or hybrid orbitals) on the other two atoms
to form two ␴ bonds. The remaining p orbitals on the center N overlap
with p orbitals on the other N to form two ␲ bonds. 63. N2:
(␴2s)2(␴2s*)2(␲2p)4(␴2p)2 in ground state, B.O.  3, diamagnetic; 1st excited
state: (␴2s)2(␴2s*)2(␲2p)4(␴2p)1(␲2p*)1, B.O.  2, paramagnetic (two unpaired
electrons) 65. F2 (␴2s)2(␴2s*)2(␴2p)2(␲2p)4(␲2p*)4; F2 should have a lower
ionization energy than F. The electron removed from F2 is in a ␲2p* antibonding
molecular orbital, which is higher in energy than the 2p atomic orbitals from
which the electron in atomic ﬂuorine is removed. Since the electron removed
from F2 is higher in energy than the electron removed from F, then it should
be easier to remove an electron from F2 than from F. 67. ␲ molecular
orbital 69. 6 sp2; 6 sp3; 0 sp; 25 ␴; 4␲ 71. a. No, some atoms are attached
differently; b. Structure 1: All N  sp3, all C  sp2; structure 2: All C and
N  sp2; c. The ﬁrst structure with the carbon–oxygen double bonds is slightly
more stable.
73. a. NCN2:

Melamine: N in NH2 groups are all sp3 hybridized. Atoms in ring are all sp2
hybridized; c. NCN2: 2 ␴ and 2 ␲ bonds; H2NCN: 4 ␴ and 2 ␲ bonds;
dicyandiamide: 9 ␴ and 3 ␲ bonds; melamine: 15 ␴ and 3 ␲ bonds;
d. The ␲ system forces the ring to be planar just as the benzene ring is planar.

Answers to Selected Exercises
e. The structure

ðN q C ON

½


M
C O NO H
D
A
ðN
H
D G
H
H

is the most important because it has three different CN bonds. This structure
is also favored on the basis of formal charge. 75. a. 25-nm light has sufﬁcient
energy to ionize N and N2 and to break the triple bond in N2. Thus, N2, N2,
N, and N will all be present, assuming excess N2. b. 85.33 nm  ␭  127 nm;
c. The ionization energy of a substance is the energy it takes to completely
remove an electron. N2: (␴2s)2(␴2s*)2(␲2p)4(␴2p)2; the electron removed from N2
is in the ␴2p molecular orbital, which is lower in energy than the 2p atomic orbital from which the electron in atomic nitrogen is removed. Since the electron removed from N2 is lower in energy than the electron removed in N, then
the ionization energy of N2 is greater than the ionization energy of N.
77. Both reactions apparently involve only the breaking of the NOCl bond.
However, in the reaction ONCl n NO  Cl some energy is released in forming the stronger NO bond, lowering the value of H. Therefore, the apparent
NOCl bond energy is artiﬁcially low for this reaction. The ﬁrst reaction
involves only the breaking of the NOCl bond. 79. a. The CO bond is polar, with the negative end around the more electronegative oxygen atom. We
would expect metal cations to be attracted to and to bond to the oxygen end
of CO on the basis of electronegativity. b. The formal charge on C is 1, and
the formal charge on O is 1. From formal charge, we would expect metal
cations to bond to the carbon (with the negative formal charge.) c. In molecular orbital theory, only orbitals with proper symmetry overlap to form bonding orbitals. The metals that form bonds to CO are usually transition metals,
all of which have outer electrons in the d orbitals. The only molecular orbitals
of CO that have proper symmetry to overlap with d orbitals are the ␲2p* orbitals, whose shape is similar to that of the d orbitals (see Fig. 9.34). Since the
antibonding molecular orbitals have more carbon character, one would expect
the bond to form through carbon. 81. The species with the smallest ionization energy has the highest energy electron. O2, N22, N2, and O2 all have
at least one electron in the high-energy ␲2p* orbitals. Because N22 has the
highest ratio of electrons to protons, the ␲2p* electrons are least attracted to
the nuclei and easiest to remove, translating into the smallest ionization
energy. 83. a. Li2 bond order  1; B2 bond order  1; b. 4 electrons must
be removed; c. 4.5  105 kJ 85. T-shaped and dsp3 hybridized

Chapter 10
13. Atoms have an approximately spherical shape. It is impossible to pack
spheres together without some empty space between the spheres. 15. Evaporation takes place when some molecules at the surface of a liquid have enough
energy to break the intermolecular forces holding them in the liquid phase.
When a liquid evaporates, the molecules that escape have high kinetic energies. The average kinetic energy of the remaining molecules is lower; thus the
temperature of the liquid is lower. 17. An alloy is a substance that contains
a mixture of elements and has metallic properties. In a substitutional alloy,
some of the host metal atoms are replaced by other metal atoms of similar size
(e.g., in brass, pewter, plumber’s solder). An interstitial alloy is formed when
some of the interstices (holes) in the closest packed metal structure are occupied by smaller atoms (e.g., in carbon steels). 19. a. As intermolecular
forces increase, the rate of evaporation decreases. b. increase T: increase rate;
c. increase surface area: increase rate 21. Sublimation will occur, allowing
water to escape as H2O1g2. 23. The strength of intermolecular forces determines relative boiling points. The types of intermolecular forces for covalent
compounds are London dispersion forces, dipole forces, and hydrogen bonding. Because the three compounds are assumed to have similar molar mass and
shape, the strength of the London dispersion forces will be about equal between the three compounds. One of the compounds will be nonpolar so it only
has London dispersion forces. The other two compounds will be polar so they
have additional dipole forces and will boil at a higher temperature than the

A53

nonpolar compound. One of the polar compounds will have an H covalently
bonded to either N, O, or F. This gives rise to the strongest type of covalent
intermolecular force, hydrogen bonding. This compound exhibiting hydrogen
bonding will have the highest boiling point while the polar compound with no
hydrogen bonding will boil at an intermediate temperature. 25. a. Both CO2
and H2O are molecular solids. Both have an ordered array of the individual
molecules, with the molecular units occupying the lattice points. A difference
within each solid lattice is the strength of the intermolecular forces. CO2 is
nonpolar and only exhibits London dispersion forces. H2O exhibits the relatively strong hydrogen bonding interactions. The difference in strength is evidenced by the solid phase change that occurs at 1 atm. CO2 sublimes at a relatively low temperature of 78°C. In sublimation, all of the intermolecular
forces are broken. However, H2O doesn’t have a solid phase change until 0°C,
and in this phase change from ice to water, only a fraction of the intermolecular forces are broken. The higher temperature and the fact that only a portion
of the intermolecular forces are broken are attributed to the strength of the intermolecular forces in H2O as compared to CO2. Related to the intermolecular forces is the relative densities of the solid and liquid phases for these two
compounds. CO2 1s2 is denser than CO2 1l2 while H2O1s2 is less dense than
H2O1l2. For CO2 1s2 and for most solids, the molecules pack together as close
as possible, which is why solids are usually more dense than the liquid phase.
For H2O, each molecule has two lone pairs and two bonded hydrogen atoms.
Because of the equal number of lone pairs and O¬H bonds, each H2O molecule can form two hydrogen bonding interactions to other H2O molecules. To
keep this symmetric arrangement (which maximizes the hydrogen bonding interactions), the H2O1s2 molecules occupy positions that create empty space in
the lattice. This translates into smaller density for H2O1s2 (less mass per unit
volume). b. Both NaCl and CsCl are ionic compounds with the anions at the
lattice points of the unit cell and the cations occupying the empty spaces created by the anions (called holes). In NaCl, the Cl anions occupy the lattice
points of a face-centered unit cell with the Na cations occupying the octahedral holes. Octahedral holes are the empty spaces created by six Cl ions. CsCl
has the Cl ions at the lattice points of a simple cubic unit cell with the Cs
cations occupying the middle of the cube. 27. In the ln Pvap versus 1T plot,
the slope of the straight line is equal to ¢Hvap /R. Because ¢Hvap is always
positive, the slope of the line will always be negative. 29. a. LD (London
dispersion); b. dipole, LD; c. hydrogen bonding, LD; d. ionic; e. LD;
f. dipole, LD; g. ionic 31. a. OCS; b. SeO 2; c. H 2NCH 2 CH 2NH 2;
d. H2CO; e. CH3OH 33. a. Neopentane is more compact than n-pentane.
There is less surface area contact among neopentane molecules. This leads to
weaker London dispersion forces and a lower boiling point. b. HF is capable
of hydrogen bonding; HCl is not. c. LiCl is ionic, and HCl is a molecular
solid with only dipole forces and London dispersion forces. Ionic forces are
much stronger than the forces for molecular solids. d. n-Hexane is a larger
molecule, so it has stronger London dispersion forces. 35. a. HBr has dipole forces in addition to LD forces; b. NaCl, stronger ionic forces; c. I2,
larger molecule so stronger LD forces; d. N2, smallest nonpolar compound
present, has weakest LD forces; e. CH4, smallest nonpolar compound present,
has weakest LD forces; f. HF, can form relatively strong hydrogen bonding
interactions, unlike the other compounds; g. CH3CH2CH2OH, unlike others, has
relatively strong hydrogen bonding. 37. H2O is attracted to glass while Hg is
not. 39. The structure of H2O2 produces greater hydrogen bonding than water. Long chains of hydrogen bonded H2O2 molecules then get tangled together. 41. 313 pm 43. 0.704 Å 45. 1.54 g/cm3 47. 174 pm; 11.6 g/cm3
49. edge, 328 pm; radius, 142 pm 51. face-centered cubic unit cell 53. For
a cubic closest packed structure, 74.06% of the volume of each unit cell is occupied by atoms; in a simple cubic unit cell structure, 52.36% is occupied. The cubic (and hexagonal) closest packed structures provide the most efﬁcient means
for packing atoms. 55. Doping silicon with phosphorus produces an n-type
semiconductor. The phosphorus adds electrons at energies near the conduction
band of silicon. Electrons do not need as much energy to move from ﬁlled to
unﬁlled energy levels so conduction increases. Doping silicon with gallium
produces a p-type semiconductor. Because gallium has fewer valence electrons
than silicon, holes (unﬁlled energy levels) at energies in the previously ﬁlled

A54

Answers to Selected Exercises

molecular orbitals are created, which induces greater electron movement
(greater conductivity). 57. p-type 59. 5.0  102 nm 61. NaCl: 4Na,
4Cl; CsCl: 1Cs, 1Cl; ZnS: 4Zn2, 4S2; TiO2: 2Ti4, 4O2 63. CoF2
65. ZnAl2S4 67. MF2 69. rO2  1.49  10 8 cm; rMg2  6.15  10 9 cm
71. a. CO2: molecular; b. SiO2: covalent network; c. Si: atomic, covalent
network; d. CH4: molecular; e. Ru: atomic, metallic; f. I2: molecular;
g. KBr: ionic; h. H2O: molecular; i. NaOH: ionic; j. U: atomic, metallic;
k. CaCO3: ionic; l. PH3: molecular 73. a. The unit cell consists of Ni at the
cube corners and Ti at the body center or Ti at the cube corners and Ni at the
body center. b. NiTi; c. Both have a coordination number of 8. 75. CaTiO3;
six oxygens around each Ti 77. a. YBa2Cu3O9; b. The structure of this superconductor material is based on the second perovskite structure. The
YBa2Cu3O9 structure is three of these cubic perovskite unit cells stacked on
top of each other. The oxygens are in the same places, Cu takes the place of
Ti, two Ca are replaced by two Ba, and one Ca is replaced by Y.
c. YBa2Cu3O7 79. Li, 158 kJ/mol; Mg, 139 kJ/mol. Bonding is stronger in
Li. 81. 89°C 83. 77°C
85.

¢H  30.79 kJ/mol 109. 46.7 kJ/mol; 90% 111. The solids with high
melting points (NaCl, MgCl2, NaF, MgF2, AlF3) are all ionic solids. SiCl4, SiF4,
Cl2, F2, PF5, and SF6 are nonpolar covalent molecules with LD forces. PCl3
and SCl2 are polar molecules with LD and dipole forces. In these 8 molecular
substances the intermolecular forces are weak and the melting points low. AlCl3
is intermediate. The melting point indicates there are stronger forces present
than in the nonmetal halides, but not as strong as for an ionic solid. AlCl3 illustrates a gradual transition from ionic to covalent bonding; from an ionic solid
to discrete molecules. 113. TiO1.182 or Ti0.8462O; 63.7% Ti2, 36.3% Ti3
115. 6.58 g/cm3

117.
a

P

4

Temp (°C)

60
40

Slope 5 > slope 3 > slope 1

3
20

Time 4 = 4 × time 2

b

T

5
80

c

As P is lowered, we go from a to b on the phase diagram. The water
boils. The evaporation of the water is endothermic and the water is cooled
(b n c), forming some ice. If the pump is left on, the ice will sublime
until none is left. This is the basis of freeze drying.
3
4
2 23  2
br d
119. The volume of the hole is p c a
3
2

121. CdS; n-type

123. 2.53 torr; 6.38  10 22 atoms

0
2
–20

1

Chapter 11

–40
–60

Time
87. 1680 kJ 89. 1490 g 91. A: solid; B: liquid; C: vapor; D: solid  vapor; E: solid  liquid  vapor (triple point); F: liquid  vapor; G: liquid 
vapor (critical point); H: vapor; the ﬁrst dashed line (at the lower temperature)
is the normal melting point, and the second dashed line is the normal boiling
point. The solid phase is denser. 93. a. two; b. higher pressure triple point:
graphite, diamond, and liquid; lower pressure triple point: graphite, liquid and
vapor; c. It is converted to diamond (the more dense solid form); d. Diamond
is more dense, which is why graphite can be converted to diamond by applying pressure. 95. Because the density of the liquid phase is greater than the
density of the solid phase, the slope of the solid–liquid boundary line is negative (as in H2O). With a negative slope, the melting points increase with a decrease in pressure so the normal melting point of X should be greater than
225°C. 97. Chalk is composed of the ionic compound calcium carbonate
(CaCO3). The electrostatic forces in ionic compounds are much stronger than
the intermolecular forces in covalent compounds. Therefore, CaCO3 should
have a much higher boiling point than the covalent compounds found in motor
oil and in H2O. Motor oil is composed of nonpolar C¬C and C¬H bonds.
The intermolecular forces in motor oil are therefore London dispersion
forces. We generally consider these forces to be weak. However, with compounds that have large molar masses, these London dispersion forces add up
signiﬁcantly and can overtake the relatively strong hydrogen-bonding interactions in water. 99. A: CH4; B: SiH4 C: NH3 101. If TiO2 conducts
electricity as a liquid, then it would be ionic. 103. B2H6, molecular; SiO2,
network; CsI, ionic; W, metallic 105. 4.65 kg/h 107. ¢E  27.86 kJ/mol;

9. 9.74 M 11. 4.5 M 13. As the temperature increases, the gas molecules
will have a greater average kinetic energy. A greater fraction of the gas molecules in solution will have kinetic energy greater than the attractive forces between the gas molecules and the solvent molecules. More gas molecules will
escape to the vapor phase, and the solubility of the gas will decrease.
15. The levels of the liquids in each beaker will become constant when the concentration of solute is the same in both beakers. Because the solute is less
volatile, the beaker on the right will have a larger volume when the concentrations become equal. Water will initially condense in this beaker in a larger
amount than solute is evaporating, while the net change occurring initially in
the other beaker is for water to evaporate in a larger amount than solute is condensing. Eventually the rate that solute and H2O leave and return to each beaker
will become equal when the concentrations become equal. 17. No. For an
ideal solution, Hsoln  0 19. Normality is the number of equivalents per
liter of solution. For an acid or a base, an equivalent is the mass of acid or base
that can furnish 1 mol of protons (if an acid) or accept 1 mol of protons (if a
base). A proton is an H ion. Molarity is deﬁned as the moles of solute per
liter of solution. When the number of equivalents equals the number of moles
of solute, then normality  molarity. This is true for acids which only have
one acidic proton in them and for bases that accept only one proton per formula
unit. Examples of acids where equivalents  moles solute are HCl, HNO3, HF,
and HC2H3O2. Examples of bases where equivalents  moles solute are NaOH,
KOH, and NH3. When equivalents  moles solute, then normality  molarity. This is true for acids that donate more than one proton 1H2SO4, H3PO4,
H2CO3, etc.) and for bases that react with more than one proton per formula
unit Ca1OH2 2, Ba1OH2 2, Sr1OH2 2, etc.4 . 21. Only statement b is true. A substance freezes when the vapor pressure of the liquid and solid phases are the
same. When a solute is added to water, the vapor pressure of the solution at
0C is less than the vapor pressure of the solid; the net result is for any ice

Answers to Selected Exercises
present to convert to liquid in order to try to equalize the vapor pressures (which
never can occur at 0C). A lower temperature is needed to equalize the vapor
pressure of water and ice, hence the freezing point is depressed. For statement
a, the vapor pressure of a solution is directly related to the mole fraction of
solvent (not solute) by Raoult’s law. For statement c, colligative properties depend on the number of solute particles present and not on the identity of the
solute. For statement d, the boiling point of water is increased because the
sugar solute decreases the vapor pressure of the water; a higher temperature is
required for the vapor pressure of the solution to equal the external pressure
so boiling can occur. 23. Isotonic solutions are those which have identical
osmotic pressures. Crenation and hemolysis refer to a phenomena that occurs
when red blood cells are bathed in solutions having a mismatch in osmotic
pressure between the inside and the outside of the cell. When red blood cells
are in a solution having a higher osmotic pressure than that of the cells, the
cells shrivel as there is a net transfer of water out of the cells. This is called
crenation. Hemolysis occurs when the red blood cells are bathed in a solution
having lower osmotic pressure than that inside the cell. Here, the cells rupture
as there is a net transfer of water to inside the red blood cells. 25. 1.06 g/mL;
0.0180 mole fraction H3PO4, 0.9820 mole fraction H2O; 0.981 mol/L; 1.02
mol/kg 27. HCl: 12 M, 17 m, 0.23; HNO3: 16 M, 37 m, 0.39; H2SO4: 18 M,
200 m, 0.76; HC2H3O2: 17 M, 2000 m, 0.96; NH3: 15 M, 23 m, 0.29 29. 35%;
0.39; 7.3 m; 3.1 M 31. 23.9%; 1.6 m, 0.028, 4.11 N 33. NaI(s) S Na(aq)
 I(aq) Hsoln  8 kJ/mol 35. The attraction of water molecules for Al3
and OH cannot overcome the larger lattice energy of Al(OH)3. 37. a. CCl4;
b. H2O; c. H2O; d. CCl4; e. H2O; f. H2O; g. CCl4; 39. Ability to form hydrogen bonding interactions, ability to break up into ions, and polarity are some
factors affecting solute solubility. a. CH3CH2OH; b. CHCl3; c. CH3CH2OH
41. As the length of the hydrocarbon chain increases, the solubility decreases
because the nonpolar hydrocarbon chain interacts poorly with the polar water
molecules. 43. 1.04  103 mol/L  atm; 1.14  103 mol/L 45. 50.0 torr
47. 3.0  102 g/mol 49. a. 290 torr; b. 0.69 51. methanol  propanol  0.500
53. solution c 55. Pideal  188.6 torr; acetone  0.512, methanol  0.488; the
actual vapor pressure of the solution is smaller than the ideal vapor
pressure, so this solution exhibits a negative deviation from Raoult’s
law. This occurs when solute–solvent attractions are stronger than for the
pure substances. 57. 101.5°C 59. 14.8 g C3H8O3 61. Tf  29.9°C, Tb
 108.2°C 63. 776 g/mol 65. a. T  2.0  105°C, ␲  0.20 torr;
b. Osmotic pressure is better for determining the molar mass of large molecules. A temperature change of 105°C is very difﬁcult to measure. A change
in height of a column of mercury by 0.2 mm is not as hard to measure precisely. 67. 0.327 M 69. a. 0.010 m Na3PO4 and 0.020 m KCl; b. 0.020 m
HF; c. 0.020 m CaBr2 71. a. Tf  0.28°C; Tb  100.077°C; b. Tf 
0.37°C; Tb  100.10°C 73. 2.63 (0.0225 m), 2.60 (0.0910 m), 2.57 (0.278
m); iaverage  2.60 75. a. yes; b. no 77. a. 26.6 kJ/mol; b. 657 kJ/mol
79. a. Water boils when the vapor pressure equals the pressure above the
water. In an open pan, Patm  1.0 atm. In a pressure cooker, Pinside  1.0 atm
and water boils at a higher temperature. The higher the cooking temperature,
the faster the cooking time. b. Salt dissolves in water, forming a solution with
a melting point lower than that of pure water ( Tf  Kf m). This happens in
water on the surface of ice. If it is not too cold, the ice melts. This process
won’t occur if the ambient temperature is lower than the depressed freezing
point of the salt solution. c. When water freezes from a solution, if freezes
as pure water, leaving behind a more concentrated salt solution. d. On the
CO2 phase diagram, the triple point is above 1 atm and CO2(g) is the stable
phase at 1 atm and room temperature. CO2(l) can’t exist at normal atmospheric pressures, which explains why dry ice sublimes rather than boils. In
a ﬁre extinguisher, P  1 atm and CO2(l) can exist. When CO2 is released
from the ﬁre extinguisher, CO2(g) forms as predicted from the phase diagram. e. Adding a solute to a solvent increases the boiling point and
decreases the freezing point of the solvent. Thus, the solvent is a liquid over
a wider range of temperatures when a solute is dissolved. 81. 0.600
83. C2H4O3; 151 g/mol (exp.); 152.10 g/mol (calc.); C4H8O6 85. 1.97%
NaCl 87. a. 100.77°C; b. 23.1 mm Hg; c. Assume an ideal solution; assume
no ions form (i  1).

89. 30.% A: xA 

0.30y
0.70x  0.30y

A55

, xB  1  xA;

y
y
,x 1
;
xy B
xy
0.80y
xA 
, x  1  xA;
0.20x  0.80y B
0.30x
0.30x
xA V 
,x V1
;
0.30x  0.70y B
0.30x  0.70y
xA V  x , xB V  1  xA V;
xy
0.80x
V
xA 
, x V  1  xA V
0.80x  0.20y B

50.% A: xA 
80.% A:
30.% A:
50.% A:
80.% A:

91. 72.7% sucrose and 27.3% NaCl by mass; 0.2 93. 0.050 95. 44% naphthalene, 56% anthracene 97. 0.20°C, 100.056C 99. a. 46 L; b. No; A
reverse osmosis system that applies 8.0 atm can purify only water with solute
concentrations less than 0.32 mol/L. Salt water has a solute concentration of
2(0.60 M)  1.2 M ions. The solute concentration of salt water is much too
high for this reverse osmosis unit to work. 101. i  3.00; CdCl2

Chapter 12
9. In a unimolecular reaction, a single reactant molecule decomposes to
products. In a bimolecular reaction, two molecules collide to give products.
The probability of the simultaneous collision of three molecules with enough
energy and orientation is very small, making termolecular steps very
unlikely. 11. All of these choices would affect the rate of the reaction, but
only b and c affect the rate by affecting the value of the rate constant k. The
value of the rate constant is dependent on temperature. It also depends on
the activation energy. A catalyst will change the value of k because the
activation energy changes. Increasing the concentration (partial pressure) of
either H2 or NO does not affect the value of k, but it does increase the rate
of the reaction because both concentrations appear in the rate law. 13. The
average rate decreases with time because the reverse reaction occurs more frequently as the concentration of products increase. Initially, with no products
present, the rate of the forward reaction is at its fastest; but as time goes on,
the rate gets slower and slower since products are converting back into reactants. The instantaneous rate will also decrease with time. The only rate that
is constant is the initial rate. This is the instantaneous rate taken at t  0. At
this time, the amount of products is insigniﬁcant and the rate of the reaction
only depends on the rate of the forward reaction. 15. When the rate doubles
as the concentration quadruples, the order is 1 2. For a reactant that has an
order of 1, the rate will decrease by a factor of 1 2 when the concentrations are doubled. 17. Two reasons are: a. the collision must involve
enough energy to produce the reaction; i.e., the collision energy must equal
or exceed the activation energy. b. the relative orientation of the reactants
must allow formation of any new bonds necessary to produce products.
19. P4: 6.0  104 mol/L  s; H2: 3.6  103 mol/L  s 21. a. average rate
of decomposition of H2O2  2.31  10 5 mol/L  s, rate of production of
O2  1.16  10 5 mol/L  s; b. average rate of decomposition of H2O2 
1.16  10 5 mol/L  s, rate of production of O2  5.80  10 6 mol/L  s
23. a. mol/L  s; b. mol/L  s; c. s 1 ; d. L/mol  s; e. L 2 /mol 2  s
25. a. rate  k[NO]2[Cl2]; b. 1.8  102 L2/mol2  min 27. a. rate 
k[NOCl]2; b. 6.6  1029 cm3/molecules  s; c. 4.0  108 L/mol  s
29. a. ﬁrst order in Hb and ﬁrst order in CO; b. rate  k[Hb][CO];
c. 0.280 L/␮mol  s; d. 2.26 ␮mol/L  s 31. rate  k[H2O2]; ln[H2O2] 
kt  ln[H2O2]0; k  8.3  104 s1; 0.037 M 33. rate  k[NO2]2;
1
1
 kt 
; k  2.08  104 L/mol  s; 0.131 M 35. a. rate 
3NO2 4
3NO2 4 0
k; [C2H5OH]  kt  [C2H5OH]0; because slope  k, then k  4.00 
1
 kt 
105 mol/L  s; b. 156 s; c. 313 s 37. rate  k[C4H6]2;
3C4H6 4

A56

Answers to Selected Exercises

1
; k  1.4  102 L/mol  s 39. second order; 0.1 M 41. a. [A] 
3C4H6 4 0
kt  [A]0; b. 1.0  102 s; c. 2.5  104 M 43. a. 160. s  t1 2 for both
the ﬁrst and second half-life; b. 532 s 45. 12.5 s 47. a. 1.1  102 M;
b. 0.025 M 49. a. rate  k[CH3NC]; b. rate  k[O3][NO]; c. rate  k[O3];
d. rate  k[O3][O] 51. Rate  k[C4H9Br]; C4H9Br  2H2O n C4H9OH 
Br  H3O; the intermediates are C4H9 and C4H9OH2.
53.

Ea

E

P
E

R
RC
55. 341 kJ/mol 57. The graph of lnk versus 1T is linear with slope 
Ea R  1.2  104 K; Ea  1.0  102 kJ/mol 59. 9.5  10 5 L/mol  s
61. 51C 63. H3O(aq)  OH(aq) n 2H2O(l) should have the faster rate.
H3O and OH will be electrostatically attracted to each other; Ce4 and Hg22
will repel each other (so Ea is much larger). 65. a. NO; b. NO2;
c. 2.3 67. CH2DOCH2D should be the product. If the mechanism is possible, then the reaction must be C2H4  D2 n CH2DCH2D. If we got this product, then we could conclude that this is a possible mechanism. If we got some
other product, e.g., CH3CHD2, then we would conclude that the mechanism is
wrong. Even though this mechanism correctly predicts the products of the
reaction, we cannot say conclusively that this is the correct mechanism; we
might be able to conceive of other mechanisms that would give the same product as our proposed one. 69. 215°C 71. 5.68  1018 molecules/cm3  s
73. 1.0  102 kJ/mol 75. At high [S], the enzyme is completely saturated
with substrate. Once the enzyme is completely saturated, the rate of decomposition of ES can no longer increase, and the overall rate remains constant.
77. a. 115 L 3/mol 3  s; b. 87.0 s; c. [A]  1.27  10 5 M, [ B]  1.00 M
k3 I 4 3 OCl 4
; k  6.0  101 s1 81. a. ﬁrst order with respect
79. rate 
3 OH 4
to both reactants; b. rate  k[NO][O3]; c. k  1.8 s1; k  3.6 s1;
d. k  1.8  1014 cm3/molecules  s 83. a. 25 kJ/mol; b. 12 s;
c.
T
Interval
54  2(Intervals)
21.0C
16.3 s
21C.
27.8C
13.0 s
28C.
30.0C
12 s 0
30.C
This rule of thumb gives excellent agreement to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
85. a. [B]  [A] so that [B] can be considered constant over the experiments. (This gives us a pseudo-order rate law equation.) b. Rate  k[A] 2[B],
k  0.050 L 2/mol 2  s 87. Rate  k[A][B] 2, k  1.4  10 2 L 2/mol 2  s
89. 2.20  10 5 s 1; 5.99  10 21 molecules 91. 1.3  10 5 s 1; 112 torr

Chapter 13
9. No, equilibrium is a dynamic process. Both the forward and reverse reactions
are occurring at equilibrium, just at equal rates. Thus the forward and reverse
reactions will distribute 14C atoms between CO and CO2. 11. 4 molecules
H2O, 2 molecules CO, 4 molecules H2, and 4 molecules CO2 are present at
equilibrium. 13. K and Kp are equilibrium constants as determined by the
law of mass action. For K, the units used for concentrations are mol/L, for Kp,
partial pressures in units of atm are used (generally). Q is called the reaction
quotient. Q has the exact same form as K or Kp, but instead of equilibrium concentrations, initial concentrations are used to calculate the Q value. Q is of use
when it is compared to the K value. When Q  K (or when Qp  Kp), the

reaction is at equilibrium. When Q  K, the reaction is not at equilibrium and
one can determine what has to be the net charge for the system to get to
equilibrium. 15. We always try to make good assumptions that simplify the
math. In some problems, we can set up the problem so that the net change, x,
that must occur to reach equilibrium is a small number. This comes in handy
when you have expressions like 0.12  x or 0.727  2x. Since x is small,
we assume that it makes little difference when subtracted from or added to
some relatively big number. When this is true, 0.12  x  0.12 and
0.727  2x  0.727. If the assumption holds by the 5% rule, then the assumption is assumed valid. The 5% rule refers to x (or 2x or 3x, etc.) that was
assumed small compared to some number. If x (or 2x or 3x, etc.) is less than
5% of the number the assumption was made against, then the assumption will
be assumed valid. If the 5% rule fails to work, one can generally use a math
procedure called the method of successive approximations to solve the
quadratic or cubic equation.
3NO4 2
3NO2 4 2
3SiCl4 4 3 H2 4 2
17. a. K 
; b. K 
; c. K 
;
3N2 4 3 O2 4
3N2O4 4
3SiH4 4 3 Cl2 4 2
d. K 

3PCl3 4 2 3Br2 4 3
3PBr3 4 2 3Cl2 4 3

19. a. 0.11; b. 77; c. 8.8; d. 4.6  104

21. 4.0  10 6 23. 1.7  105

25. 6.3  1013 27. 1.1  10 3
PH2O
3H2O 4
29. a. K 
, Kp  2
;
3NH3 4 2 3CO2 4
P NH3  PCO2
3
3
b. K  3N2 4 3 Br2 4 3, Kp  PN2  P 3
Br2; c. K  3O2 4 , Kp  P O2 ;

3H2O 4

PH2O
, Kp 
31. 8.0  109 33. a. Q  K, so reaction shifts
3H2 4
PH2
left to reach equilibrium. b. Q  K, so reaction is at equilibrium. c. Q  K,
so reaction shifts right to reach equilibrium. 35. a. decrease; b. no
change; c. no change; d. increase 37. 8.0  10 2 M 39. 3.4 41. 0.056
43. [N2]0  10.0 M, [H2 ] 0  11.0 M 45. [SO3]  [NO]  1.06 M;
[SO2]  [NO2]  0.54 M 47. 7.8  102 atm 49. PSO2  0.38 atm; PO2 
0.44 atm; PSO3  0.12 atm 51. a. [NO]  0.032 M, [Cl2]  0.016 M,
[NOCl]  1.0 M; b. [NO]  [NOCl]  1.0 M, [Cl2]  1.6  105 M; c.
[NO]  8.0  103 M, [Cl2]  1.0 M, [NOCl]  2.0 M 53. [CO2]  0.39 M,
[CO]  8.6  103 M, [O2]  4.3  103 M 55. 0.27 atm 57. a. no effect;
b. shifts left; c. shifts right 59. a. right b. right; c. no effect; d. left; e. no
effect 61. a. left; b. right; c. left; d. no
effect; e. no
effect; f. right
63. increase 65. 2.6  1081 67. a. 0.379 atm; b. 0.786 69. a. 1.16 atm;
b. 0.10 atm; c. 2.22 atm; d. 91.4% 71. [H2]  [F2]  0.0251 M;
[HF]  0.450 M 73. Added OH reacts with H to produce H2O. As H is
removed, the reaction shifts right to produce more H and CrO42. Because more
CrO42 is produced, the solution turns yellow. 75. 9.0  10 3 M
77. PPCl3  PCl2  0.2230 atm, PPCl5  0.0259 atm; Kp  1.92 79. [NOCl] 
2.0 M, [NO]  0.050 M, [Cl2]  0.025 M 81. 2.1  103 atm
83. PNO2  0.704 atm, PN2O4  0.12 atm 85. 0.63 87. 0.240 atm
89. 9.17  10 3 91. 192 g; 0.25 atm 93. C10H8; 0.0919%
d. K 

Chapter 14
17. 10.78 (4 signiﬁcant ﬁgures); 6.78 (3 signiﬁcant ﬁgures); 0.78 (2 signiﬁcant ﬁgures); A pH value is a logarithm. The numbers to the left of the decimal place identify the power of 10 to which [H] is expressed in scientiﬁc notation—for example, 10 11, 10 7, 10 1. The number of decimal places in a
pH value identiﬁes the number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in [H]. In all three
pH values, the [H] should be expressed only to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures since
these pH values have only two decimal places. 19. a. These would be 0.10
M solutions of strong acids like HCl, HBr, HI, HNO3, H2SO4 or HClO4.
b. These are salts of the conjugate acids of the bases in Table 14.3. These conjugate acids are all weak acids. Three examples would be 0.10 M solutions of
NH4Cl, CH3NH3NO3, and C2H5NH3Br. Note that the anions used to form these
salts are conjugate bases of strong acids; this is because they have no acidic
or basic properties in water (with the exception of HSO4, which has weak
acid properties). c. These would be 0.10 M solutions of strong bases like LiOH,

Answers to Selected Exercises
NaOH, KOH, RbOH, CsOH, Ca1OH2 2, Sr1OH2 2 and Ba1OH2 2. d. These are
salts of the conjugate bases of the neutrally charged weak acids in Table 14.2.
The conjugate bases of weak acids are weak bases themselves. Three examples would be 0.10 M solutions of NaClO2, KC2H3O2, and CaF2. The cations
used to form these salts are Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Ca2 , Sr2 , and Ba2
since these cations have no acidic or basic properties in water. Notice that these
are the cations in the list of the strong bases listed in part c that you should
memorize. e. There are two ways to make a neutral salt. The easiest way is
to combine a conjugate base of a strong acid (except for HSO4 2 with one of
the cations from the strong bases. These ions have no acidic/basic properties
in water so salts of these ions are neutral. Three examples would be 0.10 M
solutions of NaCl, KNO3, and SrI2. Another type of strong electrolyte that can
produce neutral solutions are salts that contain an ion with weak acid properties combined with an ion of opposite charge having weak base properties. If
the Ka for the weak acid ion is equal to the Kb for the weak base ion, then the
salt will produce a neutral solution. The most common example of this type
of salt is ammonium acetate, NH4C2H3O2. For this salt, Ka for NH4  Kb
for C2H3O2  5.6  1010. This salt, at any concentration, produces a
neutral solution.
21. a. H2O1l2  H2O1l2 ∆ H3O  1aq2  OH 1aq2 or
H2O1l2 ∆ H 1aq2  OH 1aq2


K  Kw  3 H 4 3 OH 4





b. HF1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ F 1aq2  H3O 1aq2 or


HF1aq2 ∆ H 1aq2  F 1aq2





K  Ka 

c. C5H5N1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ C5H5NH 1aq2  OH 1aq2
K  Kb 

3H 4 3 F 4
3 HF 4

3C5H5NH 4 3 OH 4

3C5H5N 4
23. a. This expression holds true for solutions of strong acids having a concentration greater than 1.0  106 M. For example, 0.10 M HCl, 7.8 M HNO3,
and 3.6  104 M HClO4 are solutions where this expression holds true.
b. This expression holds true for solutions of weak acids where the two normal assumptions hold. The two assumptions are that the contribution of H
from water is negligible and that the acid is less than 5% dissociated in water
(from the assumption that x is small compared to some number). This expression will generally hold true for solutions of weak acids having a Ka value less
than 1  104, as long as there is a signiﬁcant amount of weak acid present.
Three example solutions are 1.5 M HC2H3O2, 0.10 M HOCl, and 0.72 M
NH4NO3. c. This expression holds true for strong bases that donate 2 OH
ions per formula unit. As long as the concentration of the base is above
5  107 M, this expression will hold true. Three examples are 5.0  103 M
Ca1OH2 2, 2.1  104 M Sr1OH2 2, and 9.1  105 M Ba1OH2 2. d. This expression holds true for solutions of weak bases where the two normal assumptions hold. The assumptions are that the OH contribution from water is
negligible and that the base is less than 5% ionized in water. For the 5% rule
to hold, you generally need bases with Kb 6 1  104 and concentrations of
weak base greater than 0.10 M. Three examples are 0.10 M NH3, 0.54 M
C6H5NH2, and 1.1 M C5H5N. 25. One reason HF is a weak acid is that the
H¬F bond is unusually strong and thus, is difﬁcult to break. This contributes to
the reluctance of the HF molecules to dissociate in water. 27. a. HClO4(aq)
 H2O(l) S H3O(aq)  ClO4(aq) or HClO4(aq) S H(aq)ClO4(aq); water is commonly omitted from Ka reactions. b. CH3CH2CO2H(aq) ∆ H(aq)
 CH3CH2CO2(aq); c. NH4(aq) ∆ H(aq)  NH3(aq) 29. a. H2O,
base; H2CO3, acid; H3O, conjugate acid; HCO3 , conjugate base;
b. C5H5NH, acid; H2O, base; C5H5N, conjugate base; H3O, conjugate acid;
c. HCO3, base; C5H5NH, acid; H2CO3, conjugate acid; C5H5N, conjugate base
31. a. HClO4, strong acid; b. HOCl, weak acid; c. H2SO4, strong acid;
d. H2SO3, weak acid 33. HClO4 7 HClO2 7NH4  7 H2O 35. a. HCl;
b. HNO2; c. HCN since it has a larger Ka value. 37. a. 1.0  10 7 M,
neutral; b. 12 M, basic; c. 8.3  10 16 M, acidic; d. 1.9  10 10 M,
acidic 39. a. endothermic; b. [H  ]  [OH  ]  2.34  10 7 M 41. [37]
a . pH  pOH  7.00; b. pH  15.08, pOH  1.08; c . pH  1.08,
pOH  15.08; d. pH  4.27, pOH  9.73 [ 3 8 ] a . pH  14.18, pOH 

A57

0.18; b. pH  0.44, pOH  14.44; c. pH  pOH  7.00; d. pH 
10.85, pOH  3.14 43. a. pH  6.88, pOH  7.12, [H  ]  1.3  10 7
M, [OH  ]  7.6  10 8 M, acidic; b. pH  0.92, pOH  13.08, [H  ] 
0.12 M, [OH  ]  8.4  10 14 M, acidic; c. pH  10.89, pOH  3.11,
[H  ]  1.3  10 11 M, [OH  ]  7.8  10 4 M, basic; d. pH  pOH 
7.00, [H]  [OH]  1.0  107 M, neutral 45. pOH  11.9, [H]  8 
103 M, [OH]  1  1012 M, acidic 47. a. H, ClO4 , H2O; 0.602;
b. H, NO3 , H2O; 0.602 49. [H]  0.088 M, [OH]  1.1  1013 M,
[Cl]  0.013 M, [NO3]  0.075 M 51. Add 4.2 mL of 12 M HCl
to water with mixing; add enough water to bring the solution volume to
1600 mL. 53. a. HNO2 and H2O, 2.00; b. HC2H3O2 and H2O, 2.68
55. [H  ]  [CH3COO  ]  5.8  10 4 M,
[CH3COOH]  0.0181 M,
pH  3.24 57. [H]  [F]  3.5  103 M, [OH]  2.9  1012 M,
[HF]  0.017 M, 2.46 59. 1.96 61. a. 1.00; b. 1.30 63. a. 0.60%;
b. 1.9%; c. 5.8%; d. Dilution shifts equilibrium to the side with the greater
number of particles (% dissociation increases). e. [H] also depends on
initial concentration of weak acid. 65. 1.4  104 67. 3.5  104
69. 0.024 M
71. a. NH3 1aq2  H2O1l2 ∆ NH4 1aq2  OH 1aq2
Kb 

3NH4 4 3OH 4

;
3NH3 4
b. C5H5N 1aq2  H2O 1l2 ∆ C5H5NH 1aq2  OH 1aq2
3 C5H5NH 4 3 OH 4
Kb 
3C5H5N 4
73. NH3  C5H5N  H2O  NO3 75. a. C6H5NH2; b. C6H5NH2;
c. OH; d. CH3NH2 77. a. 13.00; b. 7.00; c. 14.30 79. a. K, OH,
and H2O, 0.015 M, 12.18; b. Ba2, OH, and H2O, 0.030 M, 12.48
81. 0.16 g 83. NH3 and H2O, 1.6  103 M, 11.20 85. a. [OH] 
8.9  103 M, [H]  1.1  1012 M, 11.96; b. [OH]  4.7  105 M,
[H]  2.1  1010 M, 9.68 87. 12.00 89. a. 1.3%; b. 4.2%
91. 9.2  107
93. H2SO3 1aq2 ∆ HSO3 1aq2  H 1aq2
Ka1 reaction
HSO3 1aq2 ∆ SO32 1aq2  H 1aq2
Ka2 reaction
95. a. 1.62; b. 3.68 97. 0.30 99. HCl  NH4Cl  KCl  KCN 
KOH 101. OCl 103. [HN3]  [OH]  2.3  106 M, [Na]  0.010 M,
[N3]  0.010 M, [H]  4.3  109 M 105. a. 5.82; b. 10.95
107. NaF 109. 3.08 111. a. neutral; b. basic; NO2  H2O ∆ HNO2 
OH; c. acidic; C5H5NH ∆ C5H5N  H; d. acidic because NH4 is a
stronger acid than NO2 is a base; NH4 ∆ NH3  H; NO2  H2O ∆
HNO2  OH; e. basic; OCl  H2O ∆ HOCl  OH; f. basic because
OCl is a stronger base than NH4 is an acid; OCl  H2O ∆ HOCl  OH,
NH4 ∆ NH3  H 113. a. HIO3  HBrO3; as the electronegativity of the
central atom increases, acid strength increases. b. HNO2  HNO3; as the number of oxygen atoms attached to the central atom increases, acid strength increases.
c. HOI  HOCl; same reasoning as in part a. d. H3PO3  H3PO4; same reasoning as in part b. 115. a. H2O  H2S  H2Se; acid strength increases as bond
energy decreases. b. CH3CO2H  FCH2CO2H  F2CHCO2H  F3CCO2H; as
the electronegativity of the neighboring atoms increases, acid strength increases.
c. NH4  HONH3; same reasoning as in part b. d. NH4  PH4; same reasoning as in part a. 117. a. basic; CaO(s)  H2O(l) → Ca(OH)2(aq); b. acidic;
SO2(g)  H2O(l) → H2SO3(aq); c. acidic; Cl2O(g)  H2O(l) → 2HOCl(aq)
119. a. B(OH)3, acid; H2O, base; b. Ag, acid; NH3, base; c. BF3, acid; F,
base 121. Al(OH)3(s)  3H(aq) → Al3(aq)  3H2O(l); Al(OH)3(s) 
OH(aq) → Al(OH)4(aq) 123. Fe3; because it is smaller with a greater positive charge, Fe3 will be more strongly attracted to a lone pair of electrons
from a Lewis base. 125. 990 mL H2O 127. a. 2.80; b. 1.1  10 3 M
129. NH4Cl 131. 4.2  10 2 M 133. 3.00 135. a. 2.62; b. 2.4%;
c. 8.48 137. a. 1.66; b. Fe2 ions will produce a less acidic solution (higher
pH) due to the lower charge on Fe2 as compared with Fe3. As the charge on a
metal ion increases, acid strength of the hydrated ion increases. 139. acidic;
HSO4 ∆ SO42  H; 1.54 141. a. Hb(O2)4 in lungs, HbH44 in cells;
b. Decreasing [CO2] will decrease [H], favoring Hb(O2)4 formation. Breathing
into a bag raises [CO2]. c. NaHCO3 lowers the acidity from accumulated CO2.

A58

Answers to Selected Exercises

143. a. H2SO3; b. HClO3; c. H3PO3; NaOH and KOH are ionic compounds
composed of either Na or K cations and OH anions. When soluble ionic compounds dissolve in water, they form the ions from which they are formed. The
acids in this problem are all covalent compounds. When these acids dissolve in
water, the covalent bond between oxygen and hydrogen breaks to form H ions.
145. 7.20. 147. 4540 mL 149. 4.17 151. 0.022 M 153. 2.5  10 3
155. PO43, Kb  0.021; HPO42, Kb  1.6  107; H2PO4, Kb  1.3  1012;
from the Kb values, PO43 is the strongest base. 157. a. basic; b. acidic;
c. basic; d. acidic; e. acidic 159. 1.0  103 161. 5.4  104 163. 3.36

Chapter 15
13. When an acid dissociates or when a salt dissolves, ions are produced. A
common ion is when one of the product ions in a particular equilibrium is
added from an outside source. For a weak acid dissociating to its conjugate
base and H, the common ion would be the conjugate base; this would be
added by dissolving a soluble salt of the conjugate base into the acid solution.
The presence of the conjugate base from an outside source shifts the equilibrium to the left so less acid dissociates. For the Ksp reaction of a salt dissolving into its respective ions, the common ion would be if one of the ions in the
salt was added from an outside source. When a common ion is present, the Ksp
equilibrium shifts to the left resulting in less of the salt dissolving into its ions.
15. The more weak acid and conjugate base present, the more H and/or OH
that can be absorbed by the buffer without signiﬁcant pH change. When the
concentrations of weak acid and conjugate base are equal (so that pH  pKa 2,
the buffer system is equally efﬁcient at absorbing either H or OH. If the
buffer is overloaded with weak acid or with conjugate base, then the buffer is
not equally efﬁcient at absorbing either H or OH. 17. The three key points
to emphasize in your sketch are the initial pH, pH at the halfway point to equivalence, and the pH at the equivalence point. For the two weak bases titrated,
pH  pKa at the halfway point to equivalence (50.0 mL HCl added) because
3 weak base4  3 conjugate acid4 at this point. For the initial pH, the strong base
has the highest pH (most basic), while the weakest base has the lowest pH
(least basic). At the equivalence point, the strong base titration has pH  7.0.
The weak bases titrated have acidic pHs at the equivalence point because the
conjugate acids of the weak bases titrated are the major species present. The
weakest base has the strongest conjugate acid so its pH will be lowest (most
acidic) at the equivalence point.

pH

Strong base

7.0

Kb=10–5
Kb=10–10

Volume HCl added (ml)
19. i. This is the result when you have a salt that breaks up into two ions. Examples of these salts (but not all) would be AgCl, SrSO4, BaCrO4, and ZnCO3
ii. This is the result when you have a salt that breaks up into three ions, either
two cations and one anion or one cation and two anions. Some examples are
SrF2, Hg2I2, and Ag2SO4. iii. This is the result when you have a salt that breaks
up into four ions, either three cations and one anion 1Ag3PO4 2 or one cation
and three anions (ignoring the hydroxides, there are no examples of this type
of salt in Table 15.4). iv. This is the result when you have a salt that breaks
up into ﬁve ions, either three cations and two anions Sr3 1PO4 2 2 or two cations
and three anions (no examples of this type of salt are in Table 15.4).
21. When strong acid or strong base is added to a sodium bicarbonate/sodium
carbonate buffer mixture, the strong acid/base is neutralized. The reaction goes to
completion resulting in the strong acid/base being replaced with a weak acid/base.
This results in a new buffer solution. The reactions are H(aq)  CO32(aq) →

HCO3(aq); OH(aq)  HCO3(aq) → CO32(aq)  H2O(l) 23. a. 2.96;
b. 8.94; c. 7.00; d. 4.89 25. 1.1% vs. 1.3  102% dissociated; the presence of C3H5O2 in solution 23d greatly inhibits the dissociation of HC3H5O2.
This is called the common ion effect. 27. a. 1.70; b. 5.49; c. 1.70; d. 4.71
29. a. 4.29; b. 12.30; c. 12.30; d. 5.07 31. solution d; solution d is a
buffer solution that resists pH changes. 33. 3.40 35. 3.48; 3.22 37. 4.36
39. a. 7.97; b. 8.73; both solutions have an initial pH  8.77. The two solutions differ in their buffer capacity. Solution b with the larger concentrations has
the greater capacity to resist pH change. 41. 15 g 43. a. 0.19; b. 0.59;
c. 1.0; d. 1.9 45. HOCl; there are many possibilities. One possibility is a
solution with [HOCl]  1.0 M and [NaOCl]  0.35 M. 47. solution d
49. a. 1.0 mol; b. 0.30 mol; c. 1.3 mol 51. a. 22 mL base added;
b. buffer region is from 1 mL to 21 mL base added. The maximum buffering region would be from 5 mL to 17 mL of base added with the halfway
point to equivalence (11 mL) as the best buffer point. c. 11 mL base added;
d. 0 mL base added; e. 22 mL base added (the stoichiometric point); f. any
point after the stoichiometric point (volume base added  22 mL)
53. a. 0.699; b. 0.854; c. 1.301; d. 7.00; e. 12.15 55. a. 2.72; b. 4.26;
c. 4.74; d. 5.22; e. 8.79; f. 12.15
57.

Volume (mL)

pH

0.0
4.0
8.0
12.5
20.0
24.0
24.5
24.9
25.0
25.1
26.0
28.0
30.0
See Solutions Guide for
59. Volume (mL)

2.43
3.14
3.53
3.86
4.46
5.24
5.6
6.3
8.28
10.3
11.29
11.75
11.96
pH plot.
pH

0.0
11.11
4.0
9.97
8.0
9.58
12.5
9.25
20.0
8.65
24.0
7.87
24.5
7.6
24.9
6.9
25.0
5.28
25.1
3.7
26.0
2.71
28.0
2.24
30.0
2.04
See Solutions Guide for pH plot.
61. a. 4.19, 8.45; b. 10.74; 5.96; c. 0.89, 7.00 63. 2.1  10 6 65. a. yellow; b. 8.0; c. blue 67. phenolphthalein 69. Phenol red is one possible
indicator for the titration in Exercise 53. Phenolphthalein is one possible
indicator for the titration in Exercise 55. 71. Phenolphthalein is one possible indicator for Exercise 57. Bromcresol green is one possible indicator for
Exercise 59. 73. The pH is between 5 and 8. 75. a. AgC2H3O2(s) ∆
Ag(aq)  C2H3O2(aq); Ksp  [Ag][C2H3O2]; b. Al(OH)3(s) ∆
Al3(aq)  3OH(aq); Ksp  [Al3][OH]3; c. Ca3(PO4)2(s) ∆
3Ca2(aq)  2PO43(aq); Ksp  [Ca2]3[PO43]2 77. a. 2.3  109;
b. 8.20  1019 79. 3.92  105 81. a. 1.6  105 mol/L; b. 9.3  105
mol/L; c. 6.5  107 mol/L 83. 3.30  10 43 85. 2.5  1022 mol/L
87. a. CaF2; b. FePO4 89. a. 4  1017 mol/L; b. 4  1011 mol/L; c. 4 
1029 mol/L 91. 2.3  1011 mol/L 93. 1.5  10 19 g 95. If the anion
in the salt can act as a base in water, then the solubility of the salt will increase

Copyright 2007 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

A59

Answers to Selected Exercises
as the solution becomes more acidic. Added H will react with the base, forming the conjugate acid. As the basic anion is removed, more of the salt will
dissolve to replenish the basic anion. The salts with basic anions are Ag3PO4,
CaCO3, CdCO3, and Sr3(PO4)2. Hg2Cl2 and PbI2 do not have any pH dependence because Cl and I are terrible bases (the conjugate bases of strong
acids).
Ag3PO4 1s2  H 1aq2 ¡ 3Ag 1aq2  HPO42 1aq2 ¡
3Ag 1aq2  H3PO4 1aq2
excess H 

CaCO3 1s2  H 1aq2 ¡ Ca 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2 ¡
Ca2 1aq2  H2CO3 1aq2 3 H2O1l2  CO2 1g2 4


2

excess H



c. Ka1  1  104; Ka2  1  108 145. pH  5.0; Ka  1  10 10
147. 3 M 149. a. 5.8  104 mol L; b. Greater; F is a weak base (Kb 
1.4  1011), so some of the F is removed by reaction with water. As
F is removed, more SrF2 will dissolve; c. 3.5  103 mol L 151. 3.00
153. 2.78

Chapter 16
7. Living organisms need an external energy source to produce the necessary
“ordering.” 9. ¢Suniv 11. As any process occurs, ¢Suniv will increase;
¢Suniv cannot decrease. Time also goes in one direction, just as ¢Suniv goes in
one direction. 13. Possible arrangements for one molecule:

CdCO3 1s2  H 1aq2 ¡ Cd2 1aq2  HCO3 1aq2 ¡
Cd2 1aq2  H2CO3 1aq2 3 H2O1l2  CO2 1g2 4
excessH

Sr3 1PO4 2 2 1s2  2H 1aq2 ¡ 3Sr 2 1aq2  2HPO42 1aq2 ¡
3Sr2 1aq2  2H3PO4 1aq2
excessH

97. yes; Q  1.9  104  Ksp 99. [K]  0.160 M, [C2O42]  3.3  107
M, [Ba2]  0.0700 M, [Br]  0.300 M 101. [Ag]  5.6  105 M
103. a.

Ni 2  CN  ∆ NiCN 

1 way
Both are equally probable.
Possible arrangements for two molecules:

K1

NiCN   CN  ∆ Ni1CN2 2

K2

Ni1CN2 2  CN  ∆ Ni1CN2 3 

K3

Ni1CN2 3   CN  ∆ Ni1CN2 4 2

K4

1 way

2 ways
Most probable

Ni 2  4CN  ∆ Ni1CN2 4 2
b.

V 3  C2O4 2 ∆ VC2O4 


VC2O4  C2O4

2

∆ V1C2O4 2 2

K1


V1C2O4 2 2   C2O4 2 ∆ V1C2O3 2 3
V

3

 3 C2O4

2

1 way

∆ V1C2O4 2 3

1 way

Possible arrangement for three molecules:

K2
K2

3

105. 6.2  10 5 107. Hg2(aq)  2I(aq) → HgI2(s) (orange precipitate);
HgI2(s)  2I(aq) → HgI42(aq) (soluble complex ion) 109. 3.3  1032 M
111. a. 1.2  108 mol/L; b. 1.5  104 mol/L; c. The presence of NH3 increases the solubility of AgI. Added NH3 removes Ag from solution by forming the complex ion Ag(NH3)2. As Ag is removed, more AgI will dissolve
to replenish the Ag concentration. 113. 4.7  10 2 mol/L 115. Test tube
1: added Cl reacts with Ag to form the silver chloride precipitate. The net
ionic equation is Ag(aq)  Cl(aq) → AgCl(s). Test tube 2: added NH3 reacts with Ag ions to form the soluble complex ion Ag(NH3)2. As this complex ion forms, Ag is removed from solution, which causes AgCl(s) to
dissolve. When enough NH3 is added, then all of the silver chloride precipitate will dissolve. The equation is AgCl(s)  2NH3(aq) → Ag(NH3)2(aq) 
Cl(aq). Test tube 3: added H reacts with the weak base NH3 to form NH4.
As NH3 is removed, Ag ions are released to solution, which can then react
with Cl to reform AgCl(s). The equations are Ag(NH3)2(aq)  2H(aq) →
Ag(aq)  2NH4(aq) and Ag(aq)  Cl(aq) → AgCl(s). 117. pOH 
3acid4
pKb  log
119. a. 10.44; b. 10.74 121. a. potassium ﬂuoride 
3 base4
HCl; b. benzoic acid  NaOH; c. acetic acid  sodium acetate; d. HOCl 
NaOH; e. ammonium chloride  NaOH 123. a. 1.8  109; b. 5.6  104;
c. 1.0  1014 125. 4.4 L 127. 180. g/mol; 3.3  104; assume acetylsalicylic acid is a weak monoprotic acid. 129. 65 mL 131. 0.210 M
133. a. 1.6  10 6; b. 0.056 mol/L 135. 2.7  105 mol L; the solubility
of hydroxyapatite will increase as a solution gets more acidic, since both phosphate and hydroxide can react with H. 6  108 mol L; the hydroxyapatite
in the tooth enamel is converted to the less soluble ﬂuorapatite by ﬂuoridetreated water. The less soluble ﬂuorapatite will then be more difﬁcult to dissolve, making teeth less susceptible to decay. See Chemical Impact on “The
Chemistry of Teeth.” 137. a. 6.7  106 mol L; b. 1.2  1013 mol L;
c. Pb(OH)2(s) will not form since Q  Ksp 139. 49 mL 141. 3.9 L
143. a. 200.0 mL; b. i. H2A, H2O; ii. H2A, HA, H2O, Na; iii. HA, H2O,
Na; iv. HA, A2, H2O, Na; v. A2, H2O, Na; vi. A2, H2O, Na, OH;

1 way

3 ways

3 ways

1 way

Equally most probable
15. Note that these substances are not in the solid state, but are in the aqueous state; water molecules are also present. There is an apparent increase in
ordering when these ions are placed in water. The hydrating water molecules
must be in a highly ordered state when surrounding these anions. 17. One
can determine ¢S° and ¢H° for the reaction using the standard entropies and
standard enthalpies of formation in Appendix 4, then use the equation
¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S°. One can also use the standard free energies of formation in Appendix 4. And ﬁnally, one can use Hess’s law to calculate ¢G°. Here,
reactions having known ¢G° values are manipulated to determine ¢G° for a
different reaction. For temperatures other than 25(C, ¢G° is estimated using
the ¢G°  ¢H°  T¢S equation. The assumptions made are that the ¢H°
and ¢S° values determined from Appendix 4 data are temperature independent. We use the same ¢H° and ¢S° values as determined when T  25°C,
then plug in the new temperature in Kelvin into the equation to estimate ¢G°
at the new temperature. 19. a, b, c 21. We draw all of the possible arrangements of the two particles in the three levels.
2 kJ
1 kJ
0 kJ
Total E 

—
—
xx
—
0 kJ

—
x
—
x
—
1 kJ

x
—
—
x
—
2 kJ

—
xx
—
—
2 kJ

x
—
x
—
—
3 kJ

xx
—
—
—
4 kJ

The most likely total energy is 2 kJ. 23. a. H2 at 100C and 0.5 atm; b. N2
at STP; c. H2O(l) 25. a. negative; b. positive 27. G  0 for b, c, d
29. 89.3 J/K  mol 31. a. yes ( G  0); b. 196 K 33. a. negative;
b. positive; c. negative; d. positive 35. a. Cgraphite(s); b. C 2H5OH(g);
c. CO2(g) 37. a. negative, 186 J/K; b. positive, 187 J/K; c. hard to
predict since n  0.; 138 J/K 39. 262 J/K  mol 41. a. H and S are
both positive; b. Srhombic 43. a. H and S are both negative; b. low

A60

Answers to Selected Exercises

temperatures 45. a. H  803 kJ, S  4 J/K, G  802 kJ;
b. H   2802 kJ, S   262 J/K, G  2880. kJ; c. H  416 kJ,
S  209 J/K, G  354 kJ; d. H  176 kJ, S  284 J/K,
G  91 kJ 47. 5.40 kJ; 328.6 K; ¢G° is negative below 328.6 K.
49. CH4(g)  CO2(g) n CH3CO2H(l), H  16 kJ, S  240. J/K,
G  56 KJ; CH3OH(g)  CO(g) n CH3CO2H(l), H  173 kJ, S 
278 J/K, G  90. kJ; the second reaction is preferred. It should be run
at temperatures below 622 K. 51. 817 kJ 53. 731 kJ/mol 55. yes
57. 188 kJ 59. a. shifts right; b. no shift since the reaction is at equilibrium; c. shifts left 61. 8.72; 0.0789 63. 140 kJ 65. 71 kJ/mol
67. H  1.1  105 J/mol; S  330 J/K  mol; The major difference in
the plot is the slope of the line. An endothermic process has a negative slope
for the ln(K) versus 1T plot, whereas an exothermic process has a positive
slope. 69. 447 J/K  mol 71. decreases; ¢S will be negative since 2 mol
of gaseous reactants form 1 mol of gaseous product. For ¢G to be negative,
¢H must be negative (exothermic). For exothermic reactions, K decreases as
T increases, so the ratio of the partial pressure of PCl5 to the partial pressure
of PCl3 will decrease. 73. 43.7 K 75. 60 77. a. 1.8  104 J/mol; shifts
left; b. 0; no shift since at equilibrium; c. 1.1  104 J/mol; shifts right;
d. 0; no shift since at equilibrium; e. 2  103 J/mol; shifts left 79. a. 2.22
 105; b. 94.3; c. 0.29 mol ATP 81. S is more favorable for reaction 2
than for reaction 1, resulting in K2  K1. In reaction 1, seven particles in solution form one particle. In reaction 2, four particles form one, which results
in a smaller decrease in disorder than for reaction 1. 83. 725 K 85. H 
286 kJ; G  326 kJ; K  7.22  1058; PO 3  3.3  1041 atm; This partial
pressure represents one molecule of ozone per 9.5  1017 L of air. Equilibrium is probably not maintained under the conditions because the concentration of ozone is not large enough to maintain equilibrium 87. a. Because
1Ea  ¢G°2
Ea
kf  A exp a
b and kr  A exp a
b,
RT
RT
1Ea  ¢G°2
Ea
kf
¢G°

b  exp a
b. Because K 
 exp a
Because
kr
RT
RT
RT
kf
¢G°
exp a
b, then K  . b. A catalyst increases the value of the rate conRT
kr
stant (increases rate) by lowering the activation energy. For the equilibrium
constant K to remain constant, both kf and kr must increase by the same factor. Therefore, a catalyst must increase the rate of both the forward and the reverse reactions. 89. a. 0.333; b. PA  1.50 atm; PB  0.50 atm; c. G 
G  RT ln(PBPA)  2722 J  2722 J  0 91. at least 7.5 torr 93. 16 g
95. 61 kJ 97. 4.1 kJ/mol

Chapter 17
13. Oxidation: increase in oxidation number, loss of electrons; reduction: decrease in oxidation number, gain of electrons 15. Reactions a, b, and c are
oxidation–reduction reactions.
Oxidizing
Agent

Reducing
Agent

Substance
Oxidized

Substance
Reduced

a. H2O
b. AgNO3
c. HCl

CH4
Cu
Zn

CH4(C)
Cu
Zn

H2O(H)
AgNO3(Ag)
HCl(H)

17. Magnesium is an alkaline earth metal; Mg will oxidize to Mg2 . The oxidation state of hydrogen in HCl is 1. To be reduced, the oxidation state of
H must decrease. The obvious choice for the hydrogen product is H2 1g2 where
hydrogen has a zero oxidation state. The balanced reaction is:
Mg1s2  2HCl1aq2 S MgCl2 1aq2  H2 1g2. Mg goes from the 0 to the 2 oxidation state by losing two electrons. Each H atom goes from the 0 to the 1
oxidation state by gaining one electron. Since there are two H atoms in the
balanced equation, then a total of two electrons are gained by the H atoms.
Hence, two electrons are transferred in the balanced reaction. When the
electrons are transferred directly from Mg to H, no work is obtained. In order to harness this reaction to do useful work, we must control the ﬂow of

electrons through a wire. This is accomplished by making a galvanic cell which
separates the reduction reaction from the oxidation reaction in order to control
the ﬂow of electrons through a wire to produce a voltage. 19. An extensive
property is one that depends on the amount of substance. The free energy
change for a reaction depends on whether 1 mol of product is produced or
2 mol of product is produced or 1 million mol of product is produced. This is
not the case for cell potentials which do not depend on the amount of substance. The equation that relates ¢G to E is ¢G  nFE. It is the n term that
converts the intensive property E into the extensive property ¢G. The n is the
number of mol of electrons transferred in the balanced reaction that ¢G is
associated with. 21. A potential hazard when jump-starting a car is that the
electrolysis of H2O1l2 can occur. When H2O1l2 is electrolyzed, the products are
the explosive gas mixture of H2 1g2 and O2 1g2. A spark produced during jump
starting a car could ignite any H2 1g2 and O2 1g2 produced. Grounding the jumper
cable far from the battery minimizes the risk of a spark nearby the battery
where H2 1g2 and O2 1g2 could be collecting. 23. You need to know the identity of the metal so you know which molar mass to use. You need to know the
oxidation state of metal ion in the salt so the mol of electrons transferred can
be determined. And ﬁnally, you need to know the amount of current and the
time the current was passed through the electrolytic cell. If you know these
four quantities, then the mass of metal plated out can be calculated. 25. See
Figure 17.3 of the text for a typical galvanic cell. The anode compartment contains the oxidation half-reaction compounds/ions, and the cathode compartment contains the reduction half-reaction compounds/ions. The electrons ﬂow
from the anode to the cathode. For each of the following answers, all solutes
are 1.0 M and all gases are at 1.0 atm. a. 7H2O(l)  2Cr3(aq)  3Cl2(g) n
Cr2O72(aq)  6Cl(aq)  14H(aq); cathode: Pt electrode; Cl2 bubbled into
solution, Cl in solution; anode: Pt electrode; Cr3, H, and Cr2O72 in solution; b. Cu2(aq)  Mg(s) n Cu(s)  Mg2(aq); cathode: Cu electrode; Cu2
in solution; anode: Mg electrode; Mg2 in solution 27. a. 0.03 V; b. 2.71 V
29. See Exercise 25 for a description of a galvanic cell. For each of the following answers, all solutes are 1.0 M and all gases are at 1.0 atm. In the salt
bridge, cations ﬂow to the cathode and anions ﬂow to the anode. a. Cl2(g) 
2Br(aq) n Br2(aq)  2Cl(aq), e  0.27 V; cathode: Pt electrode; Cl2(g)
bubbled in, Cl in solution; anode: Pt electrode; Br2 and Br in solution;
b. 3H2O(l )  5IO4(aq)  2Mn2(aq) n 5IO3(aq)  2MnO4(aq) 
6H(aq), e  0.09 V; cathode: Pt electrode; IO4, IO3, and H2SO4 (as a
source of H) in solution; anode: Pt electrode; Mn2, MnO4, and H2SO4 in
solution 31. 25a. PtCr3 (1.0 M), H (1.0 M ), Cr2O72 (1.0 M ) 0 0 Cl2 (1.0
atm)Cl (1.0 M)  Pt; 25b. Mg 0 Mg2 (1.0 M) 0 0 Cu2 (1.0 M) 0 Cu; 29a. Pt 
Br (1.0 M), Br2 (1.0 M ) 0 0 Cl2 (1.0 atm) 0 Cl (1.0 M ) 0 Pt; 29b. Pt 0 Mn2
(1.0 M ), MnO4 (1.0 M ), H (1.0 M ) 0 0 IO4 (1.0 M ), H(1.0 M ) IO3 (1.0
M ), 0 Pt 33. a. Au3(aq)  3Cu(aq) n 3Cu2(aq)  Au(s), e  1.34
V; b. 2VO2(aq)  4H(aq)  Cd(s) n Cd2(aq)  2VO2(aq)  2H2O(l),
e  1.40 V 35. a. 16H   2MnO4   10I  S 5I2  2Mn 2  8H2O,
e°cell  0.97 V,
spontaneous;
b. 16H   2MnO4   10F  S 5F2 
2Mn 2  8H2O, e°cell  1.36 V,not spontaneous 37. e  0.41 V, G
 79 kJ 39. 33a. 388 kJ; 33b. 270. kJ 41. 1.21 V 43. K  H2O
 Cd2  I2  AuCl4  IO3 45. a. no; b. yes; c. yes; d. no
47. a. Cr2O72, O2, MnO2, IO3; b. PbSO4, Cd2, Fe2, Cr3, Zn2, H2O
49. ClO(aq)  2NH3(aq) n Cl(aq)  N2H4(aq)  H2O(l ), ecell 
1.00 V; Because ecell is positive for this reaction, at standard conditions ClO
can spontaneously oxidize NH3 to the somewhat toxic N2H4. 51. a. larger;
b. smaller 53. Electron ﬂow is always from the anode to the cathode. For
the cells with a nonzero cell potential, we will identify the cathode, which
means the other compartment is the anode. a. 0; b. 0.018 V; compartment
with [Ag]  2.0 M is cathode; c. 0.059 V; compartment with [Ag]  1.0 M
is cathode; d. 0.26 V; compartment with [Ag]  1.0 M is cathode;
e. 0 55. 2.12 V 57. 1.09 V 59. a. 0.23 V; b. 1.2  105 M 61. 0.16
V, copper is oxidized. 63. 1.7  10 30 65. [25] a. G  20 kJ; 1 
103; b. G   523 kJ; 5.12  1091; [29] a. G  52 kJ; 1.4  109;
b. G  90
kJ;
2  1015 67. 2.5  10 26 69. a. no
reaction;
b. Cl2(g)  2I(aq) S I2(s)  2Cl(aq), ecell  0.82 V; G  160 kJ;
K  5.6  1027; c. no reaction; d. 4Fe2(aq)  4H(aq)  O2(g) S

Answers to Selected Exercises
4Fe3(aq)  2H2O(l), ecell  0.46 V; G  180 kJ; K  1.3  1031;
71. a. Au3(aq)  3Tl(s) S Au(s)  3Tl(aq); ecell  1.84 V; b. G 
533 kJ; K  2.52  1093; c. 2.04 V 73. 5.1  10 20 75. 6.19  10 52
77. a. 30. hours; b. 33 s; c. 1.3 hours 79. a. 16 g; b. 25 g; c. 71 g;
d. 4.9 g 81. Bi 83. 9.12 L F2 (anode), 29.2 g K (cathode) 85. 7.44 
104 A 87. 1.14  102 M 89. Au followed by Ag followed by Ni followed by Cd 91. a. cathode: Ni2  2e S Ni; anode: 2Br S Br2 
2e; b. cathode: Al3  3e S Al; anode: 2F S F2  2e; c. cathode:
Mn2  2e S Mn; anode: 2I S I2  2e 93. a. 0.10 V, SCE is anode;
b. 0.53 V, SCE is anode; c. 0.02 V, SCE is cathode; d. 1.90 V, SCE is cathode; e. 0.47 V, SCE is cathode 95. a. decrease; b. increase; c. decrease;
d. decrease; e. same 97. a. G  582 kJ; K  3.45  10102; e  1.01
V; b. 0.65 V; 99. Aluminum has the ability to form a durable oxide coating over its surface. Once the HCl dissolves this oxide coating, Al is exposed
to H and is easily oxidized to Al3. Thus, the Al foil disappears after the oxide coating is dissolved. 101. The claim is impossible. The strongest oxidizing agent and reducing agent when combined give e of only about 6 V.
103. wmax  13,200 kJ; the work done can be no larger than the free energy change. If the process were reversible all of the free energy released
would go into work, but this does not occur in any real process. Fuel cells
are more efﬁcient in converting chemical energy to electrical energy; they
are also less massive. Major disadvantage: They are expensive. 105. 0.98 V
T¢S°
¢H°
107. 0.250 mol 109. 3 111. e° 

; if we graph e versus T,
nF
nF
we should get a straight line ( y  mx  b). The slope of the line is equal
to SnF and the y-intercept is equal to  H nF. e  will have little
temperature dependence for cell reactions with S  close to zero.
113. 9.8  106 115. 2.39  107 117. a. 0.02 pH units; 6  106
M H; b. 0.001 V 119. a. 0.16 V; b. 8.6 mol 121. 3 Ag  4  4.6 
10 18 M; 3 Ni 2 4  1.5 M 123. a. 0.12 V; b. 0.54 V 125. a. 5.77  10 10;
b. 12.2 kJ/mol 127. Osmium(IV) nitrate; [Ar]4s13d10

Chapter 18
1. The characteristic frequencies of energies emitted in a nuclear reaction
suggest that discrete energy levels exist in the nucleus. The extra stability of
certain numbers of nucleons and the predominance of nuclei with even numbers of nucleons suggest that the nuclear structure might be described by using
quantum numbers. 3. b-particle production has the net effect of turning a
neutron into a proton. Radioactive nuclei having too many neutrons typically
undergo b-particle decay. Positron production has the net effect of turning a
proton into a neutron. Nuclei having too many protons typically undergo
positron decay. 5. The transuranium elements are the elements having more
protons than uranium. They are synthesized by bombarding heavier nuclei with
neutrons and positive ions in a particle accelerator. 7. ¢E  ¢mc2; The key
difference is the mass change when going from reactants to products. In chemical reactions, the mass change is indiscernible. In nuclear processes, the mass
change is discernable. It is the conversion of this discernable mass change into
energy that results in the huge energies associated with nuclear processes.
9. Sr-90 is an alkaline earth metal having chemical properties similar to calcium. Sr-90 can collect in bones replacing some of the calcium. Once imbedded inside the human body, ␤ particles can do signiﬁcant damage. Rn-222 is
a noble gas so one would expect Rn to be unreactive and pass through the body
quickly; it does. The problem with Rn-222 is the rate at which it produces alpha particles. With a short half-life, the few moments that Rn-222 is in the
lungs, a signiﬁcant number of decay events can occur; each decay event
produces an alpha particle which is very effective at causing ionization and
51
131
can produce a dense trail of damage. 11. a. 24
Cr  10e S 51
23V; b. 53 I S
0
131
68
62
0
0
62
13. a. 68
1e 
54 Xe
31Ga  1 e S 30 Zn; b. 29Cu S 1e  28 Ni;
4
208
129
129
0
c. 212
Fr
S
He

At;
d.
Sb
S
e

Te
15.
10
␣
particles;
5␤
87
2
85
51
52
1
53
particles 17. 26
Fe has too many protons. It will undergo positron production,
59
electron capture, and /or alpha-particle production. 26
Fe has too many neutrons and will undergo beta-particle production. (See Table 18.2 of the text.)

A61

18
263
259
1
19. a. 249
21. 690 hours 23. 81Kr is most
98Cf  8O S 106Sg  4 0 n; b. 104 Rf
stable since it has the longest half-life. 73Kr is “hottest” since it decays very
rapidly due to its very short half-life. 73Kr, 81s; 74Kr, 34.5 min; 76Kr, 44.4 h;
81
Kr, 6.3  105 yr
25. 6.22 mg 32P remains 27. 0.230 29. 26 g
31. 2.3 counts per minute per gram of C. No; for a 10.-mg C sample, it would
take roughly 40 min to see a single disintegration. This is too long to wait, and
the background radiation would probably be much greater than the 14C activity. Thus 14C dating is not practical for very small samples. 33. 3.8  109 yr
35. 4.3  106 kg/s 37. 232Pu, 1.715  1014 J/mol; 231Pa, 1.714  1014
J/mol 39. 12C: 1.23  1012 J/nucleon; 235U: 1.2154  1012 J/nucleon; since
56
Fe is the most stable known nucleus, then the binding energy per nucleon for
56
Fe would be larger than that of 12C or 235U. (See Fig. 18.9 of the text.)
41. 6.01513 amu 43. 2.0  1010 J/g of hydrogen nuclei 45. The
Geiger–Müller tube has a certain response time. After the gas in the tube ionizes to produce a “count,” some time must elapse for the gas to return to an
electrically neutral state. The response of the tube levels off because, at high
activities, radioactive particles are entering the tube faster than the tube can respond to them. 47. All evolved O2(g) comes from water. 49. 2 neutrons;
4 ␤ particles 51. Strontium. Xe is chemically unreactive and not readily incorporated into the body. Sr can be easily oxidized to Sr 2. Strontium is in the
same family as calcium and could be absorbed and concentrated in the body
in a fashion similar to Ca2. The chemical properties determine where radioactive material may be concentrated in the body or how easily it may be
excreted. 53. a. unstable; beta production; b. stable; c. unstable; positron
production or electron capture; d. unstable, positron production, electron
capture, or alpha production. 55. 49.7 yr 57. 1975 59. 900 g 235U
61. 7  105 m/s; 8  1016 J/nuclei; 63. Assuming that (1) the radionuclide is long lived enough that no signiﬁcant decay occurs during the time of
the experiment, and (2) the total activity is uniformly distributed only in the
rat’s blood; V  10. mL. 65. a. 126 C; b. 13N, 13C, 14N, 15O, and 15N;
22
267
c. 5.950  1011 J/mol 1H 67. 4.3  1029 69. 249
97 Bk  10 Ne S 107 Bh 
401 n; 62.7s; [Rn]7s25f 146d 5

Chapter 19
1. The gravity of the earth cannot keep H2 in the atmosphere. 3. The acidity decreases. Solutions of Be2 are acidic, while solutions of the other M2
ions are neutral. 5. The planes of carbon atoms slide easily. Graphite is not
volatile so the lubricant will not be lost when used in a high vacuum environment. 7. p-type semiconductor 9. For groups 1A–3A, the small size of H
(as compared to Li), Be (as compared to Mg), and B (as compared to Al) seems
to be the reason why these elements have nonmetallic properties, while others
in the groups 1A–3A are strictly metallic. The small size of H, Be, and B also
causes these species to polarize the electron cloud in nonmetals, thus forcing
a sharing of electrons when bonding occurs. For groups 4A–6A, a major difference between the ﬁrst and second members of a group is the ability to form
p bonds. The smaller elements form stable p bonds, while the larger elements
do not exhibit good overlap between parallel p orbitals and, in turn, do not
form strong p bonds. For group 7A, the small size of F as compared to Cl is
used to explain the low electron afﬁnity of F and the weakness of the F¬F
bond. 11. In order to maximize hydrogen bonding interactions in the solid
phase, ice is forced into an open structure. This open structure is why H2O1s2
is less dense than H2O1l2. 13. a. H  207 kJ,
S  216 J/K; b. T 
958 K 15. a. lithium oxide; b. potassium superoxide; c. sodium peroxide
17. a. Li2O(s)  H2O(l) S 2LiOH(aq); b. Na2O2(s)  2H2O(l) S
2NaOH(aq)  H2O2(aq); c. LiH(s)  H2O(l ) S H2(g)  LiOH(aq);
d. 2KO2(s)  2H2O(l ) S 2KOH(aq)  O2(g)  H2O2(aq) 19. 2Li(s) 
2C2H2(g) S 2LiC2H(s)  H2(g); oxidation–reduction 21. a. magnesium
carbonate; b. barium sulfate; c. strontium hydroxide 23. CaCO3(s) 
H2SO4(aq) S CaSO4(aq)  H2O(l )  CO2(g) 25. In the gas phase, linear
molecules would exist:

F

Be

F

A62

Answers to Selected Exercises

In the solid state, BeF2 has the following extended structure:

F

F
Be
F

F
Be

F

Be
F

27. 2  102 M 29. 3.84  106 g Ba 31. a. AlN; b. GaF3; c. Ga2S3
33. B2H6(g)  3O2(g) S 2B(OH)3(s) 35. In2O3(s)  6H(aq) S 2In3(aq) 
3H2O(l); In2O3(s)  OH(aq) S no reaction; Ga2O3(s)  6H(aq) S
2Ga3(aq)  3H2O(l); Ga2O3(s)  2OH(aq)  3H2O(l) S 2Ga(OH)4(aq)
37. 2Ga(s)  3F2(g) S 2GaF3(s); 4Ga(s)  3O2(g) S 2Ga2O3(s); 16Ga(s) 
3S8(s) S 8Ga2S3(s); 2Ga(s)  N2(g) S 2GaN(s); 2Ga(s)  6HCl(aq) S
2GaCl3(aq)  3H2(g)
39.

F

F

C
F

Ge
F

F

2

F
F

F
Ge

F

F

F

Tetrahedral;
109.5; sp3

Tetrahedral;
109.5; sp3

F

F
F
Octahedral;
90; d 2sp3

To form CF62, carbon would have to expand its octet of electrons. Carbon
compounds do not expand their octet because of the small atomic size of carbon and because there are no low energy d orbitals on carbon to accommodate
the extra electrons. 41. a. SiO2(s)  2C(s) S Si(s)  2CO(g); b. SiCl4(l) 
2Mg(s) S Si(s)  2MgCl2(s); c. Na2SiF6(s)  4Na(s) S Si(s)  6NaF(s)
43. Lead is very toxic. As the temperature of the water increases, the solubility of Pb increases. Drinking hot tap water from pipes containing lead solder
could result in higher Pb concentrations in the body. 45. C6H12O6(aq) S
2C2H5OH(aq)  2CO2(g) 47. The ␲ electrons are free to move in graphite,
thus giving it a greater conductivity (lower resistance). The electrons have the
greatest mobility within the sheets of carbon atoms. Electrons in diamond are
not mobile (high resistance). The structure of diamond is uniform in all directions; thus there is no directional dependence of the resistivity. 49. Only some
of the ice will melt; 0°C 51. It is feasible to recycle Al by melting the metal
because, in theory, it takes less than 1% of the energy required to produce the
same amount of Al by the Hall–Heroult process. 53. 60 55. 2.12 V
57. Strontium and calcium are both alkaline earth metals, so both have similar chemical properties. Since milk is a good source of calcium, strontium could
replace some calcium in milk without much difﬁculty. 59. The inert-pair effect refers to the difﬁculty of removing the pair of valence s electrons from
some of the elements in the ﬁfth and sixth periods of the periodic table. As a
result, multiple oxidation states are exhibited for the heavier elements of Groups
3A (and 4A). In, In3, Tl, and Tl3 oxidation states are all important to the
chemistry of In and Tl. 61. 3.08 63. If the compound contained Ga(II) it
would be paramagnetic and if the compound contained Ga(I) and Ga(III), it
would be diamagnetic. Paramagnetic compounds have an apparent greater mass
in a magnetic ﬁeld. 65. 59 atm in the gas phase; 1.8 mol CO2/L in the wine
67. Pb(NO3)2(aq)  H3AsO4(aq) S PbHAsO4(s)  2HNO3(aq) 69. Ca;
12.698 71. 3.34, 5.6  1011 M 73. 2.0  1037 M 75. Carbon is much
smaller than Si and cannot form a ﬁfth bond in the transition state. 77. I
79. a. 7.1 g; b. 979 nm; This electromagnetic radiation is not visible to humans;
it is in the infrared region of the electromagnetic radiation spectrum, c. n-type

Chapter 20
1. This is due to nitrogen’s ability to form strong p bonds whereas heavier
group 5A elements do not form strong p bonds. Therefore, P2, As2, and Sb2
do not form since two p bonds are required to form these diatomic substances.
3. There are medical studies that have shown an inverse relationship between
the incidence of cancer and the selenium levels in soil. The foods grown in
these soils and eventually digested are assumed to somehow furnish protection
from cancer. Selenium is also involved in the activity of vitamin E and certain
enzymes in the human body. In addition, selenium deﬁciency has been linked

to the occurrence of congestive heart failure. 5. 6 oxidation state: SO42 ,
SO3, SF6; 4 oxidation state: SO32 , SO2, SF4; 2 oxidation state: SCl2;
0 oxidation state: S8 and all other elemental forms of sulfur; 2 oxidation state:
H2S, Na2S 7. a. H2 1g2  Cl2 1g2 S 2HCl1g2; this reaction produces a lot
of energy which can be used in a cannon apparatus to send a stopper ﬂying
across the room. To initiate this extremely slow reaction, light of speciﬁc
wavelengths is needed. This is the purpose of lighting the magnesium strip.
When magnesium is oxidized to MgO, an intense white light is produced.
Some of the wavelengths of this light can break Cl¬Cl bonds and get the
reaction started. b. Br2 is brown. The disappearance of the brown color
indicates that all of the Br2 has reacted with the alkene (no free Br2 remains). c. 2Al1s2  3I2 1s2 S 2AlI3 1s2; This is a highly exothermic reaction,
hence the sparks that accompany this reaction. The purple smoke is excess
I2 1s2 being vaporized 3 the purple smoke is I2 1g2 4. 9. Nitrogen’s small
size does not provide room for all four oxygen atoms, making NO 43 unstable. Phosphorus is larger so PO43 is more stable. To form NO3, a pi
bond must form. Phosphorus doesn’t form strong pi bonds as readily as
Heat
nitrogen. 11. NO2  N2O4 6 NO 6 N2O 13. a. NH 4 NO 3 (s) ¡
N2O(g)  2H2O(g); b. 2N2O5(g) S 4NO2(g)  O2(g); c. 2K3P(s) 
6H2O(l) S 2PH3(g)  6KOH(aq); d. PBr3(l )  3H2O(l) S H3PO3(aq) 
3HBr(aq); e. 2NH3(aq)  NaOCl(aq) S N2H4(aq)  NaCl(aq)  H2O(l)
15. CaF2  3Ca3(PO4)2(s)  10H2SO4(aq)  20H2O(l) S 6H3PO4(aq) 
2HF(aq)  10CaSO4  2H2O(s) 17. 2.08 mol 19. N2H4(l)  O2(g) S
N2(g)  2H2O(g);
H  590. kJ 21. 12N2(g)  12O2(g) S NO(g)
G  Gf(NO); NO (and some other oxides of nitrogen) have weaker bonds
as compared with the triple bond of N2 and the double bond of O2. Because of
this, NO (and some other oxides of nitrogen) has a higher (positive) standard free
energy of formation as compared to the relatively stable N2 and O2 molecules.
23.
Bond order
# unpaired e
M.O.
NO
2.5
1
NO
3
0
NO
2
2
Lewis

+

Nq O

NO+

N P O mn N P O mn N P O

NO

–

NPO

NO –

Lewis structures are not adequate for NO and NO. The M.O. model gives
correct results for all three species. For NO, Lewis structures fail for oddelectron species. For NO, Lewis structures fail to predict that NO is
paramagnetic. 25. a. H3PO4  H3PO3; b. H3PO4  H2PO4  HPO42
27. The acidic protons are attached to oxygen.

O
H

O

P

O

O

P

O
O

H

H

P

O

H

O

H

O

O
P

O

H

H

H
H4P2O6

H4P2O5

29. 821 nm 31. a. 2SO2(g)  O2(g) S 2SO3(g); b. SO3(g)  H2O(l) S
H2SO4(aq); c. 2Na2S2O3(aq)  I2(aq) S Na2S4O6(aq)  2NaI(aq); d. Cu(s) 
2H2SO4(aq) S CuSO4(aq)  2H2O(l )  SO2(aq)
2
33. a.
S

O

O
O

Trigonal pyramid; ≈109.5; sp3
b.

O
O

O
O

O

V-shaped; ≈120;

sp2

O

Answers to Selected Exercises
c.

65. For the reaction

S
Cl

Cl

Br

O
M
N O N P O mn NO2 + NO
D
O

Se

the activation energy must in some way involve the breaking of a nitrogen–
nitrogen single bond. For the reaction

V-shaped; ≈109.5; sp3
d.

Br b
a

Br b

O
M
N ONP O mn O2 + N2O
D
O

Br

See-saw; a ≈ 120, b ≈ 90;
e.

dsp3

F
F

at some point nitrogen–oxygen bonds must be broken. NON single bonds (160
kJ/mol) are weaker than NOO single bonds (201 kJ/mol). In addition, resonance structures indicate that there is more double-bond character in the NOO
bonds than in the NON bond. Thus NO2 and NO are preferred by kinetics because of the lower activation energy. 67. a. NO; b. NO2; c. kcatk un  2.3;
d. ClO(g)  O( g) S O2( g)  Cl(g); O3(g)  O(g) S 2O2(g); e. The
Cl-catalyzed reaction is roughly 52 times faster (more efﬁcient) than the
NO-catalyzed reaction. 69. 5.89 71. 20. g 73. a. 287 kJ/mol; b. [IF2]:
V-shaped; sp3; 3BF4 4 : tetrahedral; sp3

F
Te

F

F
F

Octahedral; 90; d 2sp3
35. 0.301 g H2O2; 3.6  10 2 g excess HCl 37. From the following Lewis
structure, each oxygen atom has a tetrahedral arrangement of electron pairs.
Therefore, bond angles 109.5, and each O is sp3 hybridized.

F

O

O

F

Chapter 21

5. Fe2O3 1s2  6 H2C2O4 1aq2 S 2 Fe1C2O4 2 33 1aq2  3 H2O1l 2  6 H  1aq2;
The oxalate anion forms a soluble complex ion with iron in rust 1Fe2O3 2, which
allows rust stains to be removed. 7. No; both the trans or the cis forms of
Co1NH3 2 4Cl2 have mirror images that are superimposable. For the cis form,
the mirror image only needs a 90 rotation to produce the original structure.
Hence, neither the trans nor cis forms are optically active.
9. a.
CoCl42 is an example of a weak-ﬁeld case having three
unpaired electrons.

Formal charge:
0 0 0 0
Oxidation state: 1 1 1 1
Oxidation states are more useful. We are forced to assign 1 as the oxidation
state for oxygen. Oxygen is very electronegative, and 1 is not a stable oxidation state for this element. 39. a. BaCl2(s)  H2SO4(aq) S BaSO4(s) 
2HCl(g); b. BrF(s)  H2O(l) S HF(aq)  HOBr(aq); c. SiO2(s) 
4HF(aq) S SiF4(g)  2H2O(l ) 41. ClO can oxide NH3 to the somewhat
toxic N2H4. 43. a. IO4; b. IO3; c. IF2; d. IF4; e. IF6 45. XeF2
can react with oxygen and water to produce explosive xenon oxides and oxyﬂuorides. 47. Release of Sr is probably more harmful. Xe is chemically unreactive. Strontium is in the same family as calcium and could be absorbed
and concentrated in the body in a fashion similar to Ca. This puts the radioactive
Sr in the bones, and red blood cells are produced in bone marrow. Xe would
not be readily incorporated into the body. The chemical properties determine
where a radioactive material may concentrate in the body or how easily it may
be excreted. The length of time of exposure and the body part exposed to radiation signiﬁcantly affects the health hazard. 49. As the halogen atoms get
larger, it becomes more difﬁcult to ﬁt three halogens around the small N.

51.

 –
–

ý½O P C P N ð mn ðO O C q N ð mn ð O q C O N ð



Formal charge: 0

0

–1

ý½ C P NP O ý
½
Formal charge: –2

+1

0

–1

0

0



–

+1
–

0

C O N q Oð
mn ðC q NO O
ð mn ð
–1

+1

–1

–3 +1

+1

–

F

F F
GAD
G TeD

F

F

O O O
O O

small ∆
b.

The lone pair of electrons around Te exerts a stronger repulsion than the bonding pairs, pushing the four square planar F’s away from the lone pair.
57. exothermic 59. MgSO4(s) S Mg2(aq)  SO4 2(aq); NH4NO3(s) S
NH4(aq)  NO3 (aq) 61. F, Cl, Br, or I; trigonal pyramid; 109.5°
63. XeF2

O O

CN is a strong ﬁeld ligand so Co1CN2 63 will be a lowspin case having zero unpaired electrons.

O O O
large ∆

–

–2



All the resonance structures for fulminate involve greater formal charges than
in cyanate, making fulminate more reactive (less stable). 53. 32 kg bacterial
tissue
55.

A63

–

11. At high altitudes, the oxygen content of air is lower, so less oxyhemoglobin is formed which diminishes the transport of oxygen in the blood. A serious illness called high-altitude sickness can result from the decrease of O2 in
the blood. High altitude acclimatization is the phenomena that occurs in the
human body in response to the lower amounts of oxyhemoglobin in the
blood. This response is to produce more hemoglobin, and, hence, increase
the oxyhemoglobin in the blood. High-altitude acclimatization takes several
weeks to take hold for people moving from lower altitudes to higher
altitudes. 13. a. Ni: [Ar]4s23d 8; b. Cd: [Kr]5s24d10; c. Zr: [Kr]5s24d2;
d. Os: [Xe]6s24f 145d 6 15. a. Ti: [Ar]4s 23d 2; Ti2: [Ar]3d 2; Ti 4:
[Ne]3s 23p6 or [Ar]; b. Re: [Xe]6s 24f 145d 5; Re 2: [Xe]4f 145d 5; Re3:
[Xe]4f 145d 4; c. Ir: [Xe]6s 24f 145d 7; Ir 2: [Xe]4f 145d7; Ir3: [Xe]4f 145d 6
17. a. Fe3: [Ar]3d5; b. Ag: [Kr]4d10; c. Ni2: [Ar]3d 8; d. Cr 3: [Ar]3d 3
19. a. molybdenum(IV) sulﬁde, molybdenum(VI) oxide; b. MoS2, 4;
MoO3, 6; (NH4)2 Mo2O7, 6; (NH4)6Mo7O24  4H2O, 6 21. The lanthanide elements are located just before the 5d transition metals. The lanthanide
contraction is the steady decrease in the atomic radii of the lanthanide elements
when going from left to right across the periodic table. As a result of the lanthanide contraction, the sizes of the 4d and 5d elements are very similar. This
leads to a greater similarity in the chemistry of the 4d and 5d elements in a
given vertical group. 23. If rain is imminent, the large amount of water vapor
in the air would cause the reaction to shift to the right. The indicator would take

A64

Answers to Selected Exercises

on the color of the pink CoCl2  6H2O. 25. Test tube 1: added Cl reacts
with Ag to form the silver chloride precipitate. The net ionic equation is
Ag(aq)  Cl(aq) S AgCl(s). Test tube 2: added NH3 reacts with Ag ions
to form the soluble complex ion Ag(NH3)2. As this complex ion forms, Ag
is removed from the solution, which causes the AgCl(s) to dissolve. When
enough NH3 is added, then all of the silver chloride precipitate will dissolve.
The equation is AgCl(s)  2NH3(aq) S Ag(NH3)2(aq)  Cl(aq). Test tube
3: added H reacts with the weak base NH3 to form NH4. As NH3 is removed,
Ag ions are released to solution, which can then react with Cl to reform
AgCl(s). The equations are Ag(NH3)2(aq)  2H(aq) S Ag(aq) 
2NH4(aq) and Ag(aq)  Cl(aq) S AgCl(s). 27. [Co(NH3)6]I3: 3 mol
AgI; [Pt(NH3)4I2]I2: 2 mol AgI; Na2[PtI6]: 0 mol AgI; [Cr(NH3)4I2]I: 1 mol AgI.
29. a. pentaamminechlororuthenium(III) ion; b. hexacyanoferrate(II) ion;
c. tris(ethylenediamine)manganese(II) ion; d. pentaamminenitrocobalt(III)
ion 31. a. hexaamminecobalt(II) chloride; b. hexaaquacobalt(III) iodide;
c. potassiumtetrachloro-platinate(II); d. potassium hexachloroplatinate(II);
e. pentaamminechlorocobalt(III) chloride; f. triamminetrinitrocobalt(III)
33. a. K2[CoCl4]; b. [Pt(H2O)(CO)3]Br2; c. Na3[Fe(CN)2(C2O4)2];
d. [Cr(NH3)3Cl(H2NCH2CH2NH2)]I2
–

35. a.

–

K

AE
KH

O

O
OH2
OKEOE A EOE O
A
A
Co
KH H A H HK
O
O
O O
OH2

O
H2O A O
E E
Co
H H
H2O A O
O

E
A
KH

K

K

b.

2+

c.

2+

trans

Cl Cl
AD
H3NO Ir O NH3
DA
H3N Cl

Cl Cl
AD
H3NO Ir O Cl
DA
H3N NH3
cis

___
h_
__

_h_g_

High spin
h_
__

b. Fe3
h_
__

_h_g_

Low spin

h_
__
h_
__

___

_h_g_

h_
c. Ni2 __
h_
__

_h_g_

h_
__

_h_g_

_h_g_

High spin
45. weak ﬁeld 47. a. 0; b. 2; c. 2 49. 3Co1CN2 6 4 3 6 3Co1en2 3 4 3 6
3Co1H2O2 6 4 3 6 3CoI6 4 3 51. The violet complex ion absorbs yellow-green
light (  570 nm), the yellow complex ion absorbs blue light (  450 nm),
and the green complex ion absorbs red light (  650 nm). The violet complex ion is Cr(H2O)63, the yellow complex ion is Cr(NH3)63, and the green
complex ion is Cr(H2O)4Cl2. 53. CoBr42 is a tetrahedral complex ion,
while CoBr64 is an octahedral complex ion. Since tetrahedral d-orbital splitting is less than one-half the octahedral d-orbital splitting, the octahedral complex ion (CoBr64) will absorb higher-energy light, which will have a shorter
wavelength than 3.4  106 m (E  hc). 55. 5 57. a. 11 kJ; b. H° 
172.5 kJ; S°  176 J/K; T  980. K 59. 8CN 1aq2  4Ag1s2  O2 1g2
 2H2O1l2 S 4Ag1CN2 2 1aq2  4OH 1aq2 61. [Cr(NH3)5I]I2; octahedral
63. Hg2 1aq2  2I 1aq2 S HgI2 1s2,
orange precipitate; HgI2 1s2  2I 1aq2
S HgI42 1aq2, soluble complex ion 65. a. 2; b. 3; c. 4; d. 4 67. a. optical isomerism

___

___
_h_g_

_h_g_

69. Octahedral Cr complexes should be used. Cr2: [Ar]3d 4; High-spin
(weak-ﬁeld) Cr2 complexes have four unpaired electrons and low-spin (strongﬁeld) Cr2 complexes have two unpaired electrons. Ni2: [Ar]3d8; Octahedral
Ni2 complexes will always have two unpaired electrons, whether high or low
spin. Therefore, Ni2 complexes cannot be used to distinguish weak- from
strong-ﬁeld ligands by examining magnetic properties. Alternatively, the ligand
ﬁeld strengths can be measured using visible spectra. Either Cr2 or Ni2 complexes can be used for this method. 71. Pb(OH)2 will not form since Q is
less than Ksp. 73. 60 75. Ni2  d8; If A and B produced very similar crystal ﬁelds, the complex trans-[NiA2B4]2 would give an octahedral crystal ﬁeld
diagram:

I
A D NH3
H3N O Pt O NH3
DA
H3N I

cis

h_
__
h_
__

2

trans

I
A DI
H3NO Pt O NH3
DA
H3N NH
3

_h_g_

_h_g_

cis

h_
__

43. a. Fe2

b.

O

O

39. SCN, NO2, and OCN can form linkage isomers; all are able to bond
to the metal ion in two different ways. 41. Cr(acac)3 and cis-Cr(acac)2(H2O)2
are optically active.

O O
OOO

trans

d.
+

I

O
M
H2N
O

C

J

N

M

en = N
37.

+

N
A N
G G
Cr
DA D
H3N NH I
3

N
N
GAG
Cr
DAD
I I NH3

H3N

+

I N
N
GAG
Cr
DAD
H3N
I NH3

NH2CH2CH2NH2

O

CH2

M
OO O
CO
NH2 O CH2
G G
AA
A
Cu
and
A
A
D D
O
O
O
O
C
H2C O H2N
M
O

O
O
M
J
C OOO O
O OOO C
G G
A
A
AA
Cu
AA
D D
O H2N
O CH2
H2C O
NH2 O

This is paramagnetic. Because the complex ion is diamagnetic, ligands A and
B must produce different crystal ﬁelds resulting in a unique d-orbital splitting
diagram. 77. a. 0.26 V; b. From standard reduction potentials, Co3
(e°  1.82 V) is a much stronger oxidizing agent than Co(en)33 (e°  0.26
V); c. In aqueous solution, Co3 forms the hydrated transition metal complex,
Co(H2O)63. In both complexes, Co(H2O)63 and Co(en)33, cobalt exists as
Co3, which has 6 d electrons. If we assume a strong-ﬁeld case for each complex ion, then the d-orbital splitting diagram for each has the six electrons
paired in the lower-energy t2g orbitals. When each complex ion gains an electron, the electron enters the higher-energy eg orbitals. Since en is a strongerﬁeld ligand than H2O, then the d-orbital splitting is larger for Co(en)33, and
it takes more energy to add an electron to Co(en)33 than to Co(H2O)63. Therefore, it is more favorable for Co(H2O)63 to gain an electron than for Co(en)33
to gain an electron. 79. No, since in all three cases six bonds are formed between Ni2 and nitrogen. So H values should be similar. S° for formation
of the complex ion is most negative for 6NH3 molecules reacting with a metal
ion (7 independent species become 1). For penten reacting with a metal ion, 2
independent species become 1, so S° is the least negative. Thus the chelate
effect occurs because the more bonds a chelating agent can form to the metal,

Answers to Selected Exercises
the more favorable S° is for the formation of the complex ion, and the larger
the formation constant.
81.
___
dz2
___ ___ dx2  y2, dxy
___ ___ dxz, dyz
83. Place the trans NH3 ligands on the z axis with the CN ligands oriented
as indicated in the following diagram. Since CN produces a much stronger
crystal ﬁeld, the diagram will most resemble that of a square planar complex:

NC
NC

NH3
Ni

CN
CN

NH3

y
x

z
dx2 _ y2
dxy
dz2

O
O
O

dxz

O O dyz

85. a. 6; [Ar]3d2; b. 0.0496 L N2

Chapter 22
1. a. 1-sec-butylpropane

b. 4-methylhexane

CH2CH2CH3
A
CH3CHCH2CH3
3-methylhexane is correct.
c. 2-ethylpentane

CH3
A
CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH3

c.

CH2CH3
A
CHCH2CH2CH3
A
CH3

d.

Br OH
A A
CH3CHCHCH3

CH3
A
CH3CH2CHP CO CH3

This compound cannot exhibit cis
The OH functional group gets the
trans isomerism since one of the
lowest number. 3-bromo-2-butanol
double bonded carbons has the same
is correct.
two groups 1CH3 2 attached. The
numbering system should also start at
the other end to give the double bond
the lowest possible number. 2-methyl2-pentene is correct.
5. Hydrocarbons are nonpolar substances exhibiting only London dispersion
forces. Size and shape are the two most important structural features relating
to the strength of London dispersion forces. For size, the bigger the molecule
(the larger the molar mass), the stronger the London dispersion forces and the
higher the boiling point. For shape, the more branching present in a compound,
the weaker the London dispersion forces and the lower the boiling point.
7. The correct order of strength is polyhydrocarbon 6 polyester 6
polyamide. The difference in strength is related to the types of intermolecular
forces present. All of these polymers have London dispersion forces. However,
polyhydrocarbons only have London dispersion forces. The polar ester group
in polyesters and the polar amide group in polyamides give rise to additional
dipole forces. The polyamide has the ability to form relatively strong hydrogen bonding interactions, hence why it would form the strongest ﬁbers.
9. a.
OH H

CH2 P CH2  H2O

A
A
CH2 O CH2

H

b.

1 alcohol

OH H
A
A
CH2CH O CH2 2 alcohol

H

CH2CH P CH2  H2O

3-methylhexane is correct.
d. 1-ethyl-1-methylbutane

CH3CHCH2CH2CH3
A
CH2CH3

A65

major product
c.

CH3C P CH2  H2O
A
CH3

OH H
A A
CH3 C O CH2
A
CH3

H

3 alcohol

major product

CH3CH2CH2CHCH3
A
CH2CH3

3-methylhexane is correct.
All six of these are the same compound. They only differ from each other by
rotations about one or more carbon-carbon single bonds. Only one isomer of
C7H16 is present in all of these names, 3-methylhexane.
3. a.

O

CH3CH2OH
e.

OH
A
CH3CHCH3

oxidation

CH3CH

aldehyde

O

oxidation

CH3CCH3

f.

O

CH3CH2CH2OH

b.

ketone

oxidation

P

CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH3
A
CH3

d.

P

3-methylhexane is correct.
f. 4-ethylpentane

P

3-methylhexane is correct.
e. 3-methylhexane

CH3CH2C O OH

carboxylic acid

or

CH3CH2CH
g.

O

CH3OH  HOCCH3

P

oxidation

CH3CH2C O OH
H

O

P

The longest chain is 7 carbons long
and we would start the numbering
system at the other end for lowest
possible numbers. The correct
name is 3-iodo-3-methylheptane.

O

O

P

The longest chain is 4 carbons
long. The correct name is
2-methylbutane.

I CH
A A 3
CH3CH2CH2CH2C O CH2
A
CH3

P

CH3CHCH3
A
CH2CH3

CH3 O O O CCH3  H2O

ester

11. a. A polyester forms when an alcohol functional group reacts with a carboxylic acid functional group. The monomer for a homopolymer polyester must
have an alcohol functional group and a carboxylic acid functional group present

A66

Answers to Selected Exercises

in the structure. b. A polyamide forms when an amine functional group reacts with a carboxylic acid functional group. For a copolymer polyamide, one
monomer would have at least two amine functional groups present and the
other monomer would have at least two carboxylic acid functional groups
present. For polymerization to occur, each monomer must have two reactive
functional groups present. c. To form an addition polymer, a carbon-carbon
double bond must be present. To form a polyester, the monomer would need
the alcohol and carboxylic acid functional groups present. To form a polyamide,
the monomer would need the amine and carboxylic acid functional groups
present. The two possibilities are for the monomer to have a carbon-carbon
double bond, an alcohol functional group, and a carboxylic acid functional
group all present, or to have a carbon-carbon double bond, an amine functional
group, and a carboxylic acid functional group present.
13. CH3

CH2
CH3

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH3

CH

CH2 CH2
CH3

CH3

CH3

CH2
CH3

CH3 C

CH
CH2

CH2

c. CH3

CH

CH2CH2CH3

CH3 C

CH3

CH3
d. 4-ethyl-2-methylheptane; 2,2,3-trimethylhexane
21. a. 2,2,4-trimethylhexane: b. 5-methylnonane; c, 2,2,4,4-tetramethylpentane; d. 3-ethyl-3-methyloctane
23. CH3¬CH2¬CH2¬CH3;

CH3

Each carbon is bonded to four other atoms.
25. a. 1-butene; b. 4-methyl-2-hexene; c. 2,5-dimethyl-3-heptene
27. a. CH3CH2CHPCHCH2CH3; b. CH3CHPCHCHPCHCH2CH3;
c.

CH3

CH3CHCH P CHCH2CH2CH2CH3
A
CH3
CH3

29. a.

CH3

b.

CH2CH3

CH3
CH3 CH3
CH3

CH

CH

CH3
c.

15. a.

H H
A A
HO C O COH
A A
HO C O COH
A A
H H

CH2CH3

CH3

CH3
A
C O CH3
A
CH3

CH3
A
H3C O C
A
CH3
CH2CH P CHCH3

d.

CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
2-methylheptane

CH2CH3

CH3

31. a. 1,3-dichlorobutane; b. 1,1,1-trichlorobutane; c. 2,3-dichloro-2,
4-dimethylhexane; d. 1,2-difluoroethane; 33. CH 2 Cl ¬ CH 2 Cl,12-dichloroethane: There is free rotation about the C¬C single bond that doesn’t
lead to different compounds. CHCl “ CHCl, 1-2-dichloroethene: There is no rotation about the C “ C double bond. This creates the cis and trans isomers, which
are different compounds. 35. [25], compounds b and c; [27], all compounds
37. CH2PCHCH2CH2CH3 CH3CHPCHCH2CH3

CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH3
3-methylheptane

CH3
CH3CH2CH2CHCH2CH2CH3
4-methylheptane

b.

CH2 P CCH2CH3
A
CH3

CH3 CH3
CH3 C

C

CH3

CH3CHCH P CH2
A
CH3

CH3 CH3
2,2,3,3-tetramethylbutane
17. a.

c.

b.

CH3
A
CH3CHCH3

d.

CH3
A
CH3CHCH2CH2CH3

19. a. CH3CH2

CH
CH2

CH2CH2CH3
CH

CH3

CH2

CH
CH3

CH3
A
CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH3

39. Cl

H

CH3

D
G

CPC

CH
D 3

H

G

G
Cl

H

CH2CH P CH2
A
Cl
41. F

D

CH CH
D 2 3

G

G

CPC

H

CH3
CH3 C

CH3
A
CH3CHCH2CH3

CH3

CH3
b.

CH3C P CHCH3
A
CH3

H

F
A
CH2 P CHCHCH3

D

CPC

CH
D 3
G

Cl
H

CH2 P CCH3
A
Cl
H3C

D

CH
D 3

G

G

CPC

F

CH3
A
CH2 P CCH2
A
F

H

Answers to Selected Exercises

F
H3C

D
G

CPC

CH
D 3
G

H

H2CF
D

CPC

H

F

D
G

C PC

CH CH
D 2 3
G

H

G

H

D

G

H

CH3

Cl

C

D

CH
D 3
G

H

H

D

C

C

D

f. O

CH3

Cl

H

C

c.

N

amine N O C O C O C O O O H
B carboxylic
C C
H H O
acid
D
D

A
oxidation
CH3 O CH O CH3

B
CH3 O C O CH3;

CH3
A
H
CH2 P C O CH3  H2O

CH3
A
CH2 O C O CH3;
A
A
H
OH

CH3CH2CH2OH
69. a.

O
B
CH3CH2C O OH

KMnO4

O
B
CH3C O OH  HOCH2(CH2)6CH3
O
B
CH3C O O O CH2(CH2)6CH3  H2O;

b.

O
B
CH3CH2C O OH  HOCH2(CH2)4CH3

P

O

O
B
CH3CH2C O O O CH2(CH2)4CH3  H2O

2-butenal: HCCH P CHCH .
3
The formula of 2-butenal is C4H6O, while the ether has a formula of C4H8O.
61. a. CH3CH2CH2CH3

CH2CHCHCHCH

O

d.

H

Cl Cl

OH

67. a. CH3CHPCH2  Br2 S CH3CHBrCH2Br;
b.
OH
O

O O

H

D

O O

B

C

OH

OH
CH3

O

O

B

B

OH
CH3
C

CH2CH3

C

CH3

C

H

alcohol
b. 5 carbons in ring and the carbon in ¬CO2H: sp 2; the other two carbons:
sp3; c. 24 sigma bonds, 4 pi bonds 51. a. 3-chloro-1-butanol, primary:
b. 3-methyl-3-hexanol,
tertiary; c. 2-methylcyclopentanol,
secondary
53. 1-pentanol; 2-pentanol; 3-pentanol; 2-methyl-1-butanol; 2-methyl2-butanol; 3-methyl-2-butanol; 3-methyl-1-butanol; 2,2-dimethyl-1-propanol;
6 ethers 55. a. 4,5-dichloro-3-hexanone; b. 2,3-dimethylpentanal; c. 3methylbenzaldehyde or m-methylbenzaldehyde 57. a. 4-chlorobenzoic acid
or p-chlorobenzoic acid; b. 3-ethyl-2-methylhexanoic acid; c. methanoic
acid (common name = formic acid) 59. Only statement d is false.

b. Cl Cl

H

CH3
b. CH3 D

CH2CH2CH3

D

HO O

O

O

e.

D

O

ketone

CHCH3

C

H

45. a. 3 monochloro isomers of n-pentane; b. 4 monochloro isomers of
2-methylbutane; c. 3 monochloro isomers of 2,4-dimethylpentane; d. 4 monochloro isomers of methylcyclobutane 47. a. ketone; b. aldehyde; c. carboxylic acid; d. amine
49. a.
H
H
H
HD
D D amine

D
CD

C

CH3

B

B

C

B

D

D
D

c. CH3 D

D

C

CH2CHCH3
CH3

c. No reaction
O
d.

D

H

C

C

O

H

F
A
CH2 P CHCH2CH2

D

CH2CHCH3  HO

C

b.

CH
D 3

CPC

G
H2CF

43. a. CH3 D

O

CH3

F
CH3
A
A
CH P CCH3
H

O

65. a.

F
A
CH2 P CCH2CH3

A67

71. CFClPCF2
73.

c.

Cl
 HCl

CH3

d. C4H8(g)  6O2(g) ¡ 4CO2(g)  4H2O(g)
63. For the iron-catalyzed reaction, one of the ortho or para hydrogens in benzene is replaced by chlorine. When an iron catalyst is not present, then the benzene hydrogens are unreactive, which is seen for the light-catalyzed reaction
where one of the methyl hydrogens is replaced by chlorine.

CN
CN
A
A
O C O CH2 OO C O CH2 O
n
A
A
C O OCH3 C O OCH3
B
B
O
O

75.

O HN

O
B
NHC

O
B
CO
n

A68

Answers to Selected Exercises
CO2H

HO2C

CO2H

NH2 and

79. Divinylbenzene inserts itself into two adjacent polymer chains and bonds
them together. The chains cannot move past each other because of the crosslinks
making the polymer more rigid. 81. a. The polymer from 1,2-diaminoethane
and terephthalic acid is stronger because of the possibility of hydrogen bonding between chains. b. The polymer of

HO

CO2H

H2NCHC

NHCHCO2H

CH2

CH3

NHCHCO2H
CH2

CH3

OH

OH
ser–ala

ala–ser

89. a. Six tetrapeptides are possible. From NH2 to CO2H end:
phe–phe–gly–gly, gly–gly–phe–phe, gly–phe–phe–gly, phe–gly–gly–phe,
phe–gly–phe–gly, gly–phe–gly–phe b. Twelve tetrapeptides are possible.
From NH2 to CO2H end: phe–phe–gly–ala, phe–phe–ala–gly, phe–gly–phe–
ala, phe–gly–ala–phe, phe–ala–phe–gly, phe–ala–gly–phe, gly–phe–phe–ala,
gly–phe–ala–phe, gly–ala–phe–phe, ala–phe–phe–gly, ala–phe–gly–phe,
ala–gly–phe–phe 91. Ionic: his, lys, or arg with asp or glu; hydrogen bonding: ser,
glu, tyr, his, arg, asn, thr, asp, gln, or lys with any amino acid; covalent: cys with
cys; London dispersion: all amino acids with nonpolar R groups (gly, ala, pro,
phe, ile, trp, met, leu, val); dipole–dipole: tyr, thr, and ser with each other
93. Glutamic acid has a polar R group and valine has a nonpolar R group. The
change in polarity of the R groups could affect the tertiary structure of hemoglobin and affect the ability of hemoglobin to bond to oxygen.
95.
CH OH

CH2OH
O

H

2

H

H

OH

OH

OH

D-Ribose

HO

H
OH HO

Isoleucine

O
B

BO , H O NH

HN

AN P

NH ,, N
N
A
Sugar

N
A
H

B
O

ON
N

Sugar

Adenine

Uracil
109. a. glu: CTT, CTC; val: CAA, CAG, CAT, CAC; met: TAC; trp: ACC;
phe: AAA, AAG; asp: CTA, CTG; b. ACC–CTT–AAA–TAC or ACC–CTC–
AAA–TAC or ACC–CTT–AAG–TAC or ACC–CTC–AAG– TAC; c. four (see
answer in part b); d. met–asp–phe e. TAC–CTA–AAG; TAC–CTA–AAA;
TAC–CTG–AAA 111. a. 2,3,5,6-tetramethyloctane; b. 2,2,3,5-tetramethylheptane; c. 2,3,4-trimethylhexane; d. 3-methyl-1-pentyne
113. Cl
O
Cl

Cl

Cl

O

There are many possibilities for isomers. Any structure with four chlorines
replacing four hydrogens in any of the numbered positions would be an
isomer; i.e., 1,2,3,4-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin is a possible isomer.
115. 23°C: CH3¬O¬CH3; 78.5°C: CH3¬CH2¬OH 117. Alcohols consist of two parts, the polar OH group and the nonpolar hydrocarbon chain
attached to the OH group. As the length of the nonpolar hydrocarbon chain increases, the solubility of the alcohol decreases. In methyl alcohol (methanol),
the polar OH group can override the effect of the nonpolar CH3 group, and
methyl alcohol is soluble in water. In stearyl alcohol, the molecule consists
mostly of the long nonpolar hydrocarbon chain, so it is insoluble in water.
119. n-hexane, 69C; pentanal, 103C; 1-pentanol, 137C; butanoic acid,
164C. 121. 1-butene 123. ethanoic acid 125. In nylon, hydrogen-bonding interactions occur due to the presence of N¬H bonds in the polymer. For
a given polymer chain length, there are more N¬H groups in nylon-46 as compared to nylon-6. Hence, nylon-46 forms a stronger polymer compared to
nylon-6 due to the increased hydrogen-bonding interactions.
127. a.

H2N

NH2

and HO2C

CO2H

H

H
O HN

OH

H

O
B
NHC

b. Repeating unit:

H
A
H3C O C*O OH
A
H2N O C*O CO2H
A
H
Threonine

O
B
CO
n

D-Mannose

97. aldohexose: glucose, mannose, galactose; aldopentose: ribose, arabinose;
ketohexose: fructose; ketopentose; ribulose 99. They differ in the orientation
of a hydroxy group on a particular carbon. Starch is composed from
␣-D-glucose, and cellulose is composed from ␤-D-glucose.
101. The chiral carbons are marked with asterisks.

H
A
H3C O C*O CH2CH3
A
H2NO C*O CO2H
A
H

is optically active. The chiral carbon is marked with an asterisk.
105. C–C–A–G–A–T–A–T–G 107. Uracil will H-bond to adenine.

O
H

H

Cl
A
Br O C* O CH P CH2
A
H

K
O

is more rigid because the chains are stiffer due to the rigid benzene rings in
the chains. c. Polyacetylene is nHCKCH n O
( CHPCHO
)n. Polyacetylene is
more rigid because the double bonds in the chains make the chains stiffer.
83. a. serine; tyrosine; threonine; b. aspartic acid; glutamic acid; c. histidine; lysine; arginine; tryptophan; d. glutamine; asparagine 85. a. aspartic
acid and phenylalanine; b. Aspartame contains the methyl ester of phenylalanine. This ester can hydrolyze to form methanol, ROCO2CH3  H2O ∆
RCO2H  CH3OH.
O
O
87.

H2NCHC

103.

A

H2N

HO2C

A

77.

The two polymers differ in the substitution pattern on the benzene rings. The
Kevlar chain is straighter, and there is more efﬁcient hydrogen bonding between Kevlar chains than between Nomex chains. 129. a. The bond angles
in the ring are about 60. VSEPR predicts bond angles close to 109. The bonding electrons are much closer together than they prefer, resulting in strong
electron–electron repulsions. Thus ethylene oxide is unstable (reactive).
b. The ring opens up during polymerization and the monomers link together
through the formation of OOC bonds.

O O O CH2CH2 O OO CH2CH2 O OO CH2CH2 O
n

131. H2N O CH O CO2H

A
CH2CH2CO2–Na+

or H2N O CH O CO2–Na+
A
CH2CH2CO2H

Answers to Selected Exercises
c.

The ﬁrst structure is MSG, which is impossible for you to predict. 133. In the
reaction, POO and OOH bonds are broken and POO and OOH bonds are
formed. Thus H L 0. S  0, since two molecules are going to form one
molecule. Thus G  0, not spontaneous.
CH3 O
135.


1.0 M H: H3N

CH

C

CH

C

CH3
A
e. CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3 CH2CHCH2CH3
A
A
OH
OH
CH3
CH3
A
A
CH2OCOCH3
CH3CHCH2CH2
A
A
A
OH
OH CH3

O

137. Both ¢H and ¢S are positive values.
ror image is superimposable.
b.

OH
OH
A
A
e C OOO C e
H
CO2H
CO2H H

0

0

139. 6.07

141. a. No; the mir-

OH
OH
A
A
e C OOO Ce
HO2C
H
H
CO2H

0

147.

0

O
B
O OCH2CH2OCNH

143.

O
B
HC q C O C q C O HC P C P CH O HC P CH O HC P CH O CH2O C O OH
13

12 11
145. a.

10

9

8

CH3CHCH2CH3
CH3

b. CH2

CCH3
CH3

7

6

5

CH2

d. CH2PCHCH3

OH;

CH3 O
1.0 M OH: H2N

CH3

A69

4

3

2

1

O
O
B
B
NHCOCH2CH2OCNH

O
B
NHC O
n

149. a. The temperature of the rubber band increases when it is stretched;
b. exothermic (heat is released); c. As the chains are stretched, they line
up more closely resulting in stronger dispersion forces between the chains.
Heat is released as the strength of the intermolecular forces increases.
d. G is positive and S is negative; e. The structure of the stretched polymer chains is more ordered than in unstretched rubber. Disorder decreases as
the rubber band is stretched. 151. 0.11% 153. 5 155. a. 37.50%;
b. The hybridization changes from sp2 to sp3; c. 3,4-dimethyl-3-hexanol

Index

A (mass number), 50, 52, 841, 842
Abelson, Phillip H., 302
Absolute zero, 185, 764
Absorbance, A17–A19
Absorption, 558
Accelerators, 57, 83, 302,
849–850, 864
Accuracy, 12–13, A10
Acetic acid, 628, 1014
in buffered solution, 684–686,
689, 693–694
percent dissociation, 641–642
reaction with strong base, 149
titration of, 700–705, 707, 716
as weak electrolyte, 130, 132
Acetone, 502, 504, 1013
Acetylene, 396–397, 1006
Acetylsalicylic acid, 1015
Acid–base equilibrium problems
approximations in, 637, 638
with bases, 645–650
with buffered solutions, 684–695
with common ion, 681–683
major species in, 634–635, 636,
637, 666, 667
with polyprotic acids, 650–655
with salts, 655–660
strategies for, 634–635,
666–667
with strong acids, 634–635
with weak acids, 635–644
Acid–base indicators, 151–152,
711–716
Acid–base reactions, 140,
149–154
equivalent mass in, 487
in gas phase, 625–626
Acid–base titrations, 151–153,
696–711. See also
Equivalence point; pH curve
end point of, 152, 711, 714
indicators for, 151–152,
711–716
Ka derived from, 707–709
strong acid–strong base,
696–699, 705, 716
strong base–strong acid, 699
weak acid–strong base,
153–154, 700–709, 716
weak base–strong acid,
709–711
Acid dissociation constant (Ka),
624–625
calculating from Kb, 656

A70

for hydrogen halides, 927–928
for monoprotic acids, 628, A22
from percent dissociation,
643–644
pH of salt solutions and,
659–660
for polyprotic acids, 650–651,
655, A23
from titration, 707–709
Acidic oxides, 662–663, 665
Acidic solutions
with common ions, 681–683
of covalent oxides, 662–663, 665
ion-product constant in, 630
oxidation–reduction reactions
in, 162–166
of salts, 657–659, 660
solubility in, 724, 728, 729,
730, 735
Acid rain, 212–213, 214, 559, 922
Acids. See also pH; Strong acids;
Weak acids
concepts of, 131, 149, 623–626,
663–665
dilution of, 137–139
diprotic, 627, 650, 653–655
monoprotic, 628, A22
names of, 66–67
organic, 628, 1014–1015
polyprotic, 650–655, 682, A23
reaction with water, 623–624
safe dilution of, 139
sour taste of, 131, 623
strength of, 626–631, 661–662
as strong electrolytes, 131
structural properties of,
661–662
triprotic, 650–652
water as, 629, 646
Acid salts, of amines, 649
Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene
(ABS), 1025
Actinide series, 302, 306, 308,
875, 943
Activated complex, 553
Activation energy, 553–557,
558, 593
Addition
in exponential notation, A2–A3
signiﬁcant ﬁgures, 14–15
Addition polymerization,
1019, 1021
Addition reactions, 998, 1007
Adhesive forces, 429

Adrenaline, 648
Adsorption, 558, 559
Aerosol cans, 500–501, 561,
909, 912
Aerosols, 500, 515
Air. See also Atmosphere
liquefaction of, 879–880, 919
Air bags, 197
Air pollution, 179, 211–214
acid rain and, 212–213, 214,
559, 922
catalytic converters and, 254,
559, 560
electrostatic precipitator
and, 515
metallurgy and, 981
photochemical smog, 213, 906
Alchemy, 39, 40, 46, 47
Alcohols, 1010–1013. See also
Ethanol; Methanol
Aldehydes, 1013–1014
Alkali metals (Group 1A), 55,
316–318, 880–882
atomic radii, 876
crystal structure, 441
hydrides of, 884
hydroxides of, 318, 644
ionization energies, 310,
316, 317
naming of ions, 60, 61
production of, 824–825,
879, 880
qualitative analysis of, 731
solubility of salts, 144
Alkaline earth metals (Group 2A),
55, 884, 885–888
hydroxides of, 644–645,
724, 885
Alkalis. See Bases
Alkanes, 997–1005
Alkenes, 1005–1008.
See also Ethylene
Alkyl substituents, 1000
Alkynes, 1006, 1007
Allomones, 379
Alloys, 442–443, 978
for corrosion prevention,
815–816
dental amalgam, 975
Alloy steels, 443, 815–816, 984,
985, 986
Alpha (␣) particles, 48–49, 843,
844, 931
biologic effects, 864, 865

Alum (aluminum sulfate), 666
Alumina. See Aluminum oxide
Aluminosilicates, 448
Aluminum, 304, 878, 888–890
corrosion of, 813, 889
hydrated ion of, 659, 661,
664–665, 666, 889
production of, 821–822, 981
Aluminum hydroxide, 644–645
Aluminum oxide, 339–340,
813, 889
in aluminum production,
822, 981
in gemstones, 970
in slag, 984
Alvarez, Luis, 1, 80
Alvarez, Walter, 80
Amide linkage, 1027
Amines, 646, 648–649,
1015–1016
Amino acids, 562, 1025–1028,
1032, 1039, 1040
Ammine ligand, 958, 960
Ammonia, 906–907
autoionization of, 629
in buffered solution, 690–692
hydrogen bonding in, 907
as Lewis base, 664
as ligand, 731–733, 734–735,
736, 957, 960, 968
molecular structure, 369, 393
as polar molecule, 336, 907
thermodynamic stability,
903–904
titration of, 709–711
as weak base, 132–133, 646,
647–649
Ammonia synthesis. See also
Haber process
bacterial, 906
entropy change, 762–763
equilibrium constant, 585, 586,
587, 609–610, 906
equilibrium position, 585,
604–606
free energy change, 766,
771–772, 776
rate, 582, 906
reaction quotient, 593–594
stoichiometry, 108–110
Ammonium chloride, 649,
657–658, 682, 907
Ammonium dihydrogen
phosphate, 917

Index
Ammonium ion, 55, 144
Ammonium nitrate, 910, 911
Ammonium nitrite, 905
Ammonium salts, 907
Amorphous solids, 430, 432. See
also Glass
red phosphorus, 913–914, 915
Ampere (A), 817
Amphoteric substances, 629–631,
876, 888–889, 981
amu (atomic mass units), 78, 79,
82, 83
Amylopectin, 1034
Amylose, 1034
Analyte, 151, 152
Anderson, Christopher, 40
Angular momentum, 285,
293–294
Anions, 54
common monatomic, 61
as effective bases, 724
electron afﬁnity and, 312–313
names of, 58, 61, 62, 66–67
of nonmetals, 55, 315, 876
oxyanions, 62, 66–67, 928–929
sizes of, 340–342
Anode, 792, 798, 800, 816
Anodic regions, in steel, 815
Antacids, 105–106, 644–645
Antibiotics, 90–91, 379
Antibonding molecular orbital,
404–405
Anticodon, 1039
Antifreeze, 24, 497, 506–507, 1012
Antilog, 634, A5
Antimony, 901, 902
Antioxidants, 160–161
Antiparticles, 844, 864
Antitumor agents, 963
Approximations. See also
Uncertainty in measurement
in acid–base calculations,
637, 638
of model, 199–200
successive, A8–A10
Aqua ligand, 958
Aqua regia, 735, 803
Aqueous solutions. See also
Acidic solutions; Basic
solutions; Electrolytes;
Hydration; Solutions
base strength in, 657
ion-product constant in,
629–631, 632–633, 656
in metallurgy, 981–982
oxidation–reduction reactions
in, 162–168
phase diagram for, 504, 506
properties of water in, 127–129
symbol for, 98, 128, 131
temperature effects, 495–496
Argon, 304, 305, 436, 919, 932

Aromatic alcohols, 1012
Aromatic amines, 1015, 1016
Aromatic hydrocarbons,
1008–1010
Arrhenius, Svante, 129, 131,
132–133, 553, 554, 623
Arrhenius acid–base concept, 131,
149, 623, 626, 644, 663
Arrhenius equation, 555–557
Arsenic, 901, 902
Art, chemistry of, 4
Aspdin, J., 892
Aspirin, 238, 1015
Astatine, 924, 925
Atactic chain, 1023
Atmosphere. See also Air
carbon dioxide in, 211, 212,
254–256
chemistry in, 179, 211–214
composition of, 211
ozone in, 211, 212–213, 260,
559–561, 1004
Atmospheric pressure, 179–180,
181, 211
Atomic masses, 78–81, 82
early work on, 44–45, 46, 300
Atomic mass units (amu), 78, 79,
82, 83
Atomic number (Z), 50, 52, 55,
841, 842
Atomic orbitals, 291, 292. See
also d orbitals; f orbitals;
Hybridization; p orbitals;
s orbitals
ﬁlling, in periodic table,
302–309
of hydrogen atom, 292–296
in localized electron bonding
model, 353–354
of polyelectronic atoms, 299
Atomic radii, 313–314, 876–878
of transition metals, 948–949
Atomic solids, 435, 436, 458.
See also Metals
network solids, 436,
443–454, 458
Atomic spectrum, 284–285, 290
Atomic weights, 44, 79
Atoms, 3–4. See also Elements;
Hydrogen atom
ancient Greek ideas, 39–40, 275
Bohr model, 285–287, 290,
291, 292, 293
calculating the number of, 84–85
Dalton’s theory, 41–44, 275, 960
early physics experiments,
45–49
polyelectronic, 298–299
quantum mechanical model,
275, 290–299
structure of, 49–50
symbols for, 50, 52, 841

viewing with microscope, 2,
438–439
Aufbau principle, 302, 350
Austentite, 986
Autoionization, 629–631, 635, 646
Automobiles. See Cars
Average, of measurements, 12, 13,
A10–A11
Average atomic mass, 79, 81
Average mass, 77–78
Average rate, 530
Avogadro, Amadeo, 44, 185
Avogadro’s hypothesis, 44
Avogadro’s law, 185–186, 202
Avogadro’s number, 82
Azeotrope, 912, 913
Baekeland, Leo H., 1017
Bakelite, 1017
Baking soda, 105–106
Balance, 10, 11, 12
Balancing chemical equations,
97–102
for oxidation–reduction, 162–168
Ball-and-stick models, 53, 55
Band model, 441–442
Bar, 246
Barium, 885, 886
Barium hydroxide, 144, 644
Barium sulfate, 144, 489, 717
Barometer, 180–181, 460
Bartlett, Neil, 932
Bases. See also Acid–base
titrations; pH; Strong bases;
Weak bases
common anions as, 724
concepts of, 131, 149, 623–624,
625–626, 644, 663–665
in nucleic acids, 1036,
1038, 1039
strength of, 628–629, 657
taste and feel of, 131, 623
water as, 623–624, 626, 627,
629, 657
Basic oxides, 662, 663, 667, 876
Basic oxygen process, 985
Basic solutions
of ionic oxides, 663, 876
ion-product constant in, 630
oxidation–reduction reactions
in, 166–168
of salts, 655–657, 659, 660
solubility in, 724, 728–729, 730
Batteries, 808–813
charging, 816
dead, 805, 809
deﬁnition of, 808
jump starting, 4, 809–810
lead storage, 24, 808–810,
893, 922
printed, 809
work done by, 778–779

A71

Bauer, Georg, 39
Bauxite, 821, 822, 981
Bayer process, 981
Becker, Luann, 80, 81
Beckman, Arnold, 632–633
Becquerel, Henri, 48
Beer–Lambert law, A17–A19
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 893
Bent, Henry, 779
Bent structure, 372
Benzene, 414–415, 1008–1009
Berrie, Barbara, 4
Beryllium, 303, 360, 407, 885, 886
Beryllium chloride, 367, 886
Beryllium oxide, 876, 885
Berzelius, Jöns Jakob, 45, 46–47
Beta (␤) particles, 48, 842,
843–844, 847, 853
biologic effects, 864, 865
in nucleosynthesis, 851
Bicarbonate ion, 62, 63
in water softening, 645
Bicycles, materials for, 443, 889,
952–953
Bidentate ligand, 957, 961
Big bang theory, 850–851
Bimolecular step, 550, 551
Binary covalent compounds,
naming of, 63–65
Binary ionic compounds. See also
Ionic compounds (salts)
crystal structures, 344, 435,
436, 456–458
formation of, 342–346
Lewis structures, 354
naming of, 58–61, 65–66
predicting formulas, 339–340
Binding energy per nucleon,
858–859
Biodiesel, 262–263
Biologic systems. See also
Carbohydrates; Human body;
Nucleic acids; Plants; Proteins
alkali metal ions in, 317, 882
alkaline earth metals in, 886
chiral molecules in,
1031–1032, 1034
communication in, 378–379
coordination complexes in,
973–977
energy in, 154, 229, 973
entropy in, 755, 756
enzymes in, 557, 558, 562–563
ice and, 22–23, 516
mercury toxicity, 893, 975
nitrogen in, 906
radiation and, 847, 863–866
Biot, Jean, 961
Bipyramidal structure, trigonal,
371–372, 401, 402–403, 902,
903, 917
Bismuth, 901, 902

A72

Index

Black phosphorus, 913, 914
Blasco, Steve, 444
Blast furnace, 983–984
Bleach, household, 643
Blowing agent, 908
Body-centered cubic (bcc) unit
cell, 433, 441
Bogs, lead in, 51
Bohr, Niels, 285, 286
Bohr model, 285–287, 290, 291,
292, 293
Boiler scale, 496
Boiling, 26, 467
Boiling chips, 466
Boiling point, 464, 465, 466
hydrogen bonding and,
427–428
pressure dependence of, 469
Boiling-point elevation,
504–505, 513
Bomb calorimeter, 240–242
Bond angles, 370–371, 375,
376–377, 378
Bond energies
average values, 351
bonding concept and, 330–332,
348–349
bond order and, 409–410
in chemical reactions,
351–353, 749
electronegativity and, 334
of homonuclear diatomic
molecules, 409–410
of hydrogen halides, 661, 927
as potential energy, 231–232,
331, 332
Bonding molecular orbital, 404,
405, 441
Bonding pairs, 353, 354, 355
in VSEPR model, 367,
369, 371
Bond length, 331, 351, 352
of homonuclear diatomic
molecules, 409
Bond order, 405–406
of homonuclear diatomic
molecules, 407, 408,
409–410, 411
Bond polarity. See Polar covalent
bonds
Bonds, 52, 329–330. See also
Bond energies; Covalent
bonds; Ionic bonds
electronegativity and,
333–335, 346
types of, 330–333
Bond strength. See Bond energies;
Bond order
Boranes, 245, 888
Boron, 303, 888
electron-deﬁcient compounds,
358–359, 360, 664, 888

molecular orbital model,
407–408, 409, 410
nutritional requirement, 889
paramagnetism, 410
Boron tetraﬂuoride ion, 402
Boron triﬂuoride, 358–359,
367–368, 664
Borosilicate glass, 448
Boyle, Robert, 6, 39–40, 181
Boyle’s law, 181–184, 186, 189,
200–201
Bragg, William Henry, 433
Bragg, William Lawrence, 433
Bragg equation, 433, 434
Brand, Henning, 914
Brass, 443, 955
Breeder reactors, 862–863
Brine, electrolysis, 825–826
Brittle tin, 892
Bromide salts, solubility, 144
Bromine, 924–927, 928, 929–930
Bromo ligand, 958, 968
Bromthymol blue, 712–713,
714, 715
Br$nsted, Johannes N., 149, 623
Br$nsted-Lowry acid–base
concept, 149, 623, 625–626,
644, 661, 663, 664, 665
Bronze, 892, 955
Brooks, Robert, 40
Buckminsterfullerenes, 80–81, 891
Buffered solutions, 684–696
choice of weak acid for,
695–696
how they work, 687–689
pH changes in, 684, 685–686,
693–695
pH of, 684–685, 689–691
summary, 692–693
in titration of weak acid,
700, 705
Buffering capacity, 693–696
Bumping, 466
Buret, 10–13, 151, 152, 696
Burton, William, 253
Butane, 998, 999, 1003
Cadmium, 306, 308
Calcine, 984, 985
Calcite. See Calcium carbonate
Calcium, 305, 885, 886–887
Calcium carbonate. See also
Limestone
as boiler scale, 496
decomposition, 589, 610
on sunken treasure, 821
in water softening, 645, 887
Calcium hydroxide, 144, 644, 645
Calcium oxide, 214, 339, 589,
645, 663
Calcium phosphate, 159, 717,
720, 916

Calcium sulfate, 144, 917
in gypsum, 213, 892, 916, 920
Calcium sulﬁte, 214
Calculations. See Approximations;
Signiﬁcant ﬁgures
Calorimetry, 237–242
Cannizzaro, Stanislao, 45
Capillary action, 429
Capsaicin, 414
Captive zeros, 13, 14
Carbohydrates, 1031–1036.
See also Sugars
Carbon, 303, 890–891. See also
Diamond; Graphite; Organic
chemistry
atomic mass, 78, 79, 82
atomic size, 876–877
as coke, 980, 983, 984, 985
as fullerenes, 80–81, 891
hybrid orbitals of, 391–392,
393–397
isotopes of, 79, 84
as network solid, 443–446
phase diagram, 470–471
as reducing agent, 879, 980
in steel, 443, 816, 879, 984,
985, 986
Carbon-14, 842, 853–854
Carbonate minerals, 979, 980
Carbonate salts, 144, 730
Carbon dioxide, 681, 891
acidic solution of, 650, 663,
724, 891
atmospheric, 211, 212,
254–256
bond polarities, 336
in ﬁre extinguishers, 471
from fossil fuels, 179, 229,
255, 891
liquid, 471
molecular structure, 356,
395–396, 877, 891
phase diagram, 470–471
as real gas, 208, 210–211
solid, 454, 463, 470–471, 748
solubility in water, 493, 495, 497
in space vehicles, 105
Carbon ﬁber composites, 952
Carbonic acid, 650
Carbon monoxide, 891
bonding in, 401–402, 891
catalytic conversion of, 560
in iron metallurgy, 980,
983, 984
as ligand, 958, 977
in syngas, 256–257
toxicity of, 891, 977
Carbon suboxide, 891
Carbonyl group, 1013
Carbonyl ligand, 958
Carboxyhemoglobin, 977
Carboxyl group, 628, 1014

Carboxylic acids, 1014–1015.
See also Acetic acid
Carboxypeptidase-A, 562, 563
Carothers, Wallace H., 1017, 1022
Cars. See also Air pollution;
Gasoline
air bags, 197
antifreeze, 24, 497,
506–507, 1012
batteries, 4, 24, 778–779,
808–810
catalytic converters,
254, 559, 560
electric, 811
ethanol fuel, 263, 1012
fuel cells for, 812, 813
hydrogen fuel, 261–262, 812,
813, 885
magnetorheological shock
absorbers, 431
methanol fuel, 257, 263, 1011
nitrous oxide in fuel, 912
Catalysis, 557–563
by enzymes, 557, 558, 562–563
in Haber process, 558, 582, 906
heterogeneous, 558–559
homogeneous, 558, 559–563
Catalytic converters, 254, 559, 560
Cathode, 792, 798, 800, 816
Cathode-ray tubes, 45–46, 282
Cathodic protection, 816
Cathodic regions, 815
Cation-exchange resin, 887
Cations, 53, 54. See also
Complex ions
common monatomic, 58, 61
of metals, 55, 315, 340, 875
names of, 59, 60, 61, 62, 65
qualitative analysis of,
729–731, 734–736
sizes of, 340–342
Cavendish, Henry, 132
Cell potential, 793. See also
Galvanic cells
concentration and, 803–808
in electrolysis, 816, 818–820
at equilibrium, 805, 807–808
free energy and, 802, 804, 805
from half-cell potentials,
794–800
work done by, 793,
800–801, 816
Cellulose, 1034, 1035–1036
Cellulose nitrate, 1016, 1017
Celsius scale, 19–23, 185
Cementite, 986
Centimeter (cm), 9, 13, 17–18
Ceramics, 448–449
Certain digits, 11
Cesium, 316, 317, 344, 880,
881, 882
Chain reaction, nuclear, 860–861

Index
Chain theory, 960
Changes of state, 425, 426, 459,
463–466
entropy and, 754, 756–757
phase diagrams for, 467–471,
504, 506
Charge
current and, 817
on electron, 45, 48, 50
formal, 363–367
on ion, 59, 60, 61, 157
on mole of electrons, 801
oxidation state and, 155–156,
157, 363–364
partial, 128, 332
work and, 793, 800, 801
Charge density, of ion, 318
Charge distribution, of dipolar
molecule, 335–336
Charles, Jacques, 184
Charles’s law, 184–185, 186,
189, 201
Chelating ligands, 956–957
Chemical bonds. See Bonds
Chemical change, 27–28, 96–97
Chemical energy, 231–232, 749.
See also Bond energies
Chemical equations, 96–97
balancing, 97–102
meaning of, 98
for oxidation–reduction,
162–168
physical states in, 98
for reactions in solution,
145–146
Chemical equilibrium.
See Equilibrium
Chemical formula, 52
determination of, 91–96
from name, 59
Chemical kinetics. See Rate laws;
Reaction mechanisms;
Reaction rates
Chemical reactions. See Reactions
Chemical vapor deposition
(CVD), 471
Chemistry, history of, 39–42,
43–45
Chi (mole fraction), 195–198,
485, 486
Chip laboratories, 138
Chiral isomers, 964–965,
1031–1032, 1034
Chlor-alkali process, 825–826
Chlorate salts, 929
Chloride ion, 54–55, 58
as ligand, 731, 958, 968
Chloride salts. See also
Sodium chloride
in qualitative analysis, 729,
735–736
solubility in water, 144

Chlorinated alkanes, 1003–1004
Chlorinated organic pollutants,
156–157
Chlorine, 924–930
from bleach, 643
oxyacids and oxyanions of, 62,
67, 928–929
production of, 825–826
in water puriﬁcation, 919
Chlorite ion, 929
Chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs), 561,
1003–1004
Chloro ligand, 958, 968
Chlorophyll, 973
Chromate salts, 144, 952, 953
Chromatography, 27
Chromium, 947, 948, 951–953
electron conﬁguration, 305,
308, 315, 350, 946
Chromous ion, 951
cis–trans isomerism, 961, 963,
965, 1006
Clausius–Clapeyron equation, 463
Clays, 332–333, 447, 448, 515,
892
Cleaning solution, 953
Closest packing
in ionic solids, 456–458
in metals, 436–441
Coagulation, 515
Coal, 213–214, 252–253, 254
Coal gasiﬁcation, 256–257
Coal slurries, 257
Cobalt, 1, 305, 947, 954
Codons, 1038, 1039
Coefﬁcients, 98
Coffee-cup calorimeter, 237
Cohesive forces, 429
Coke, 980, 983, 984, 985
Colligative properties, 504
boiling-point elevation,
504–505, 513
of electrolyte solutions,
512–513
freezing-point depression, 504,
505, 506–507, 512, 513
osmotic pressure, 508–511, 513
Collision model, of rates,
552–557
Collision of gas molecules.
See Kinetic molecular theory
Colloids, 514–515
Colors
of complex ions, 946, 955,
969–971
of ﬁreworks, 288–289
of gemstones, 970–971
of paintings, 4
of plasma monitor, 282–283
in spectroscopy, A16, A18
Combustion
of alkanes, 1003

calorimetry of, 241–242
early studies of, 40–41
of ethanol, 98–99
for formula determination,
91–92
of methane, 812–813
oxidation–reduction in, 154,
158–159
Common ion effect, 681–683,
718, 722–724. See also
Buffered solutions
Common names, 57, 64
Communication, chemical,
378–379
Complete ionic equation, 145, 146
Complex ions, 945–946. See also
Coordination compounds
colors of, 946, 955, 969–971
crystal ﬁeld model, 967–973
equilibria of, 731–736
in hydrometallurgy, 981–982
isomerism in, 960–965
localized electron model,
965–967
naming of, 958–959
paramagnetic, 946, 955, 968, 976
in qualitative analysis, 734–735
Composition
mass percent, 89–91, 485,
486, 488
of solutions, 133–140, 485–488
Compounds. See also Names of
compounds
Dalton’s atomic theory and,
41–44
deﬁnition of, 27
enthalpy of formation, 246
formula determination, 91–96
noble gas conﬁgurations of,
338–339
percent composition, 89–91
standard states, 246
Compressibility, 25, 210, 211, 425
Compton, Arthur, 280
Computer chips, 47, 452–453
Concentrated solution, 485
Concentration
cell potential and, 803–808
equilibrium position and,
585–586, 605–607
free energy and, 770
of a gas, 586, 587, 588
of pure solid or liquid, 589
of solutions, 133–140, 485–488
Concentration cells, 804
Concrete, 892
Condensation, 459
Condensation polymerization,
916, 1027, 1037
Condensed states, 426
Conduction bands, 442, 444,
446, 450

A73

Conductivity. See Electrical
conductivity; Thermal
conductivity
Conjugate acid, 624
of weak base, 646, 658
Conjugate base, 624, 625,
628–629
of strong acid, 626
of weak acid, 627, 656
Conservation of energy,
229, 232, 749
Conservation of mass, 6, 41, 98
Constant-pressure calorimetry,
237–240
Constant-volume calorimetry,
240–242
Constructive interference, 282,
432, 434
Contact potential, 451
Contact process, 922
Conté, Nicolas-Jacques, 332
Continuous spectrum, 284–285
Control rods, 861–862
Conversion of units, 16–19, A26
for pressure, 181
for temperature, 19–23
Coordinate covalent bond,
731, 956, 966
Coordination compounds,
955–960. See also Complex
ions
biologic, 973–977
Coordination isomerism, 960–961
Coordination number, 731, 956
Copolymers, 1020–1021,
1024–1025
Copper, 55, 955
corrosion of, 814, 955
electron conﬁguration, 305,
308, 315, 350, 947
electroplating of, 816–818, 819
electroreﬁning of, 823–824
properties, 436, 438–439, 947
Core electrons, 304, 309–310, 312
Corrosion, 813–816
of aluminum, 813, 889
of copper, 814, 955
of iron, 776–777, 813,
814–816, 954
prevention of, 814, 815–816, 824
of silver, 814, 820, 821
of transition metals, 945
Coulomb’s law, 330, 344
Counterions, 955, 958, 959, 960
Covalent atomic radii, 313
Covalent bonds, 52, 332. See also
Bond energies; Lewis
structures; Localized electron
(LE) model; Polar covalent
bonds; VSEPR model
coordinate, 731, 956, 966
electronegativity and, 335, 346

A74

Index

Covalent bonds (continued)
as a model, 347–350
noble gas conﬁguration
and, 338
in nonmetals, 55, 338
in solids, 436, 443–444, 458
Covalent compounds
binary, names of, 63–65
oxidation states in, 155–158
Covalent hydrides, 884
boiling points of, 427–428
of boron, 245, 888
of Group 6A elements, 918
Cracking, 253, 883
Crenation, 510
Critical ﬁssion reaction, 860, 861
Critical mass, 861
Critical point, 468, 470
Critical pressure, 468
Critical temperature, 468
Crosslinking, of polymers,
1017, 1018
Cryolite, 822
Crystal ﬁeld model, 967–973
Crystalline solids, 430, 432–436.
See also Ionic compounds
(salts); Metals; Solids
entropy at 0 K, 763–764
lattices of, 432, 435, 436
surface properties, 438–439
types of, 435–436
X-ray diffraction by, 281–282,
432–434
Cubic closest packed (ccp)
structure, 436, 437, 438–441,
456–458
Cubic unit cells, 433
Curie, Irene, 849
Curie, Marie, 918
Curie, Pierre, 918
Current. See Electric current
Cutler, Richard, 160
Cyanidation, 981, 982
Cyanide ion, 356–357, 412,
639–641, 657, 977
Cyano ligand, 958, 959, 968, 977
Cycles per second, 276
Cyclic alkanes, 1004–1005
Cyclic alkenes, 1006
Cyclotron, 849–850
Cysteine, 1030
Cytochromes, 973, 977
Dacron, 1021
Dalton, John, 41–44, 52,
194, 275, 960
Dalton’s law of partial pressures,
194–199, 202
Dating methods, 51, 853–855
Davis, James H., 495
Davisson, C. J., 282
Davy, Humphry, 912

DDT, 489
de Broglie, Louis, 281, 290
de Broglie’s equation, 281, 282
Decay series, 846, 849
Decimal point
in exponential notation, A1–A2
signiﬁcant ﬁgures and, 13–16
Deﬁnite proportion, law of, 41
Degenerate orbitals
atomic, 295, 299, 303
molecular, 408
Degree, of temperature, 19, 20, 21
Degree symbol, on
thermodynamic function,
246, 760
Dehydrogenation reactions, 1004
Delocalized electrons, 349
in benzene, 414–415,
1008–1009
combined model of, 413–415
in graphite, 446
in metallic solids, 436
resonance and, 362,
413–414, 415
Delta
partial charge, 128, 332
splitting of 3d orbitals, 968–972
Demokritos, 39, 275
Denaturation of proteins, 1030
Denitriﬁcation, 906
Density, 24–25
of closest packed solid,
438–441
of gas, 193–194
in group of elements, 316
uncertainty in measurement,
A12–A13
of water, 425, 426, 469
Dependent variable, A6
Depletion force, 756
Desalination, 26, 511
Desorption, 559
Destructive interference, 282,
432, 434
Detergents, 645, 887, 916
Determinate error, 12, A10
Dextrorotatory isomer, 964–965,
1031–1034
Dialysis, 509–510
Diamagnetism, 409, 410,
412, 968, 976
Diamond, 436, 443–444, 446, 891
entropy of, 764
graphite and, 244, 246, 446,
768–769, 769
low-pressure production of,
470–471
Diamond anvil pressure cell, 358
Diaphragm cell, 826
Diatomic molecules, 3, 406–413
Diborane, 245, 888
Dichromate ion, 951–953

Dicyclopentadiene, 1018–1019
Diesel, Rudolf, 262
Diethylenetriamine (dien), 957
Diethyl ether, 461–462
Diethylzinc (DEZ), 667
Differential rate law, 533,
534–538, 548
Diffraction, 281–282, 432–434
Diffractometer, 434
Diffusion, 206, 207–208
Dihydroxyacetone (DHA),
1032–1033
Dilute solution, 485
Dilution, 137–140
Dimensional analysis, 16–19
Dimer, 1021
Dinitrogen monoxide, 546,
909–910, 912
Dinitrogen pentoxide, 911
kinetics of decomposition,
534–535, 538–540
Dinitrogen tetroxide, 594–595, 911
Dinitrogen trioxide, 909, 911
Dinosaurs, 1, 51, 80, 81
Dioxygen diﬂuoride, 929
Dipeptide, 1027
Dipole–dipole attraction, 426.
See also Hydrogen bonding
in molecular solids, 454, 456
in proteins, 1030
Dipole moments, 335–338, 346.
See also Polar molecules
induced, 428–429
square planar structure and, 374
of sulfur dioxide, 376
Diprotic acids, 627, 650, 653–655
Direct reduction furnace, 984
Disaccharides, 1034.
See also Sucrose
Disorder, 751, 764, 779
Dispersion, colloidal, 514–515
Dispersion forces. See London
dispersion forces
Disproportionation, 929
Dissociation, percent of, 641–644
Dissociation constant. See Acid
dissociation constant;
Ion-product constant
Distillation, 26
Disulﬁde linkage, 1030
Division
in exponential notation, A2
signiﬁcant ﬁgures, 14, 15
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid),
756, 1036–1039
Dobereiner, Johann, 300
Doping, of semiconductors, 450,
452, 453
d orbitals, 294, 295, 297, 299
in bonding, 359–360, 918
in complex ions, 966, 967–973
ﬁlling of, 305–307

of Group 4A elements, 890
of phosphorus, 913
in transition metals, 943,
946–947
Double bonds, 351, 352. See also
Ethylene
in hydrocarbons, 998,
1005–1008
hydrogenation and, 558–559,
883, 998, 1007
Lewis structures, 356
sigma and pi bonds in,
394–395, 396, 1005, 1006
in VSEPR model, 375–376
Double displacement, 140
Downs cell, 824–825
Drake, Edwin, 253
dsp3 orbitals, 397–399, 401
in complex ion, 966
in Group 5A, 902, 903
d 2sp3 orbitals, 399–400, 401
in complex ion, 966
in Group 5A, 902, 903
Dry ice, 454, 463, 471, 748
Ductility, 55, 436, 441, 443, 444
Duet rule, 354, 355
du Pont, Eleuthère, 288
Dyes, 277
Dynamite, 905
Effusion, 206–207
Eiler, John M., 260
Einstein, Albert, 278–280,
856–857, 865
Electrical conductivity
of aqueous solutions,
129–130, 132
of graphite, 444, 446
of melted ionic compound,
347, 348
of metals, 436, 441, 442, 944
of silicon, 450
Electrical insulator, 444
Electrical potential.
See Cell potential
Electric arc method, 985
Electric charge. See Charge
Electric current
conduction bands and, 442
in electrochemistry, 791
in electrolyte solutions, 129, 435
in electroplating, 816–817
in Geiger counter, 852
in piezoelectric substance, 1024
in semiconductor, 451
units of, 817
work done by, 778–779, 800–801
Electric power. See Energy
sources
Electrochemistry, 791. See also
Cell potential; Electrolysis;
Galvanic cells

Index
Electrodes, 792, 798, 800, 816
glass, 807
ion-selective, 807
overvoltage and, 820
standard hydrogen, 794
Electrolysis, 816–820
commercial uses of, 821–826,
879, 885, 887–888, 980
of mixtures of ions, 819–820
overvoltage in, 820
of water, 3–4, 27, 258,
809–810, 818–819, 883
Electrolytes, 129–133, 145,
435, 512–515
Electromagnetic force, 864, 865
Electromagnetic radiation,
275–277. See also Light;
Photons; Ultraviolet radiation
gamma rays, 48, 844, 864, 865
infrared, 254–255, 276, 279, 810
quantization of, 278–280, 285
spectroscopy with, A16–A19
Electromotive force (emf).
See Cell potential
Electron, 48, 50. See also Beta (␤)
particles; Delocalized
electrons; Valence electrons
annihilation of, 844
in Bohr model, 285–287, 290,
291, 292, 293
early experiments, 45–48
paramagnetism and, 409
photoelectric effect and,
279–280
as wave, 282–284, 290
Electron acceptor, 159
Electron afﬁnity, 312–313, 316
Electron capture, 844
Electron conﬁgurations
of atoms, 302–309, 314–315
of ionic compounds, 339–340
of stable compounds, 338–339
Electron correlation problem,
298, 403
Electron-deﬁcient compounds,
358–359, 360, 664, 888
Electron density map, 292,
293, 296
Electron donor, 159
Electronegativity, 333–335
acid strength and, 661, 662
percent ionic character and,
346, 347
Electron-pair acceptor, 663–665
Electron-pair donor, 663–665
ligand as, 731
Electron-pair repulsion.
See VSEPR model
Electron sea model, 441
Electron spin, 296, 298, 303
Electron transfer, 154, 158–160,
163, 167

Electroplating, 815, 816–817,
819, 824
Electroreﬁning, 823–824
Electrostatic forces, 426,
514–515, 863
Electrostatic precipitator, 515
Elementary step, 550
Elements. See also Periodic table;
Representative elements
abundance, 878–879
deﬁnition of, 28
diatomic, 3
early ideas about, 39–40, 41,
43, 46, 47
original names, 56
oxidation state, 156, 879
preparation, 879–880
standard enthalpy of
formation, 249
standard free energy of
formation, 769
standard state, 246
transformation of, 849–852
emf (electromotive force).
See Cell potential
Emission spectrum
of alkali metal ions, 731
in ﬁreworks, 288
of hydrogen atom, 284–285, 290
Empirical formula, 93–94, 96
Enantiomers, 964–965
Endothermic process, 231,
232, 233
enthalpy change, 236
entropy change, 757
equilibrium constant, 610
End point, of titration, 152,
711, 714
Energy, 229–235. See also Bond
energies; Heat; Kinetic
energy; Potential energy
of activation, 553–557,
558, 593
biologic, 154, 229, 973
chemical, 231–232, 749
conservation, 229, 232, 749
deﬁnition of, 229
electrical, 792
of electromagnetic radiation,
276, 278–280
of hydrogen atom, 285–287,
290, 295–296
internal, 232–236
of ionic lattice, 342, 343,
344–346
lower, as driving force, 757, 758
mass associated with, 280, 844,
856–857, 864
of nuclear binding, 858–859
of polyelectronic atoms, 299
quantization of, 278–280,
285–287, 290, 291, 293

radiation damage and, 863,
864, 865
sign of, 232–233
of solution formation, 488–492
as state function, 231, 342
thermal, 757
transfer of, 230
units of, 205, 233, A26
wasted, 778, 779, 801, 810–811
zero point of, 286, 331
Energy crisis, 214, 779
Energy sources. See also
Batteries; Fossil fuels
alternative, 256–263
conventional, 252–256
fuel cells, 812–813
nuclear power, 861–863, 866
redox reactions in, 154
thermophotovoltaic, 810–811
English system of units, 8, 16–19
Enthalpy, 235–236
bond energies and, 351–353
calorimetry and, 237–240
entropy change and, 758
as extensive property, 238,
243–244
free energy and, 759–762,
766–767
Hess’s law for, 242–246, 247
pressure and, 771
sign of change in, 239, 243, 249
standard, 246–252, 767
Enthalpy of formation, standard,
246–252, 767, A19–A22
Enthalpy of fusion, 425, 464
Enthalpy of hydration, 491,
927, 928
Enthalpy of solution, 489–492,
496, 502, 503
Enthalpy of vaporization, 425,
426, 459, 461–463
Entropy, 751–755. See also
Spontaneous processes
absolute values, 763–764
in chemical reactions,
762–766
deﬁnition of, 758
free energy and, 759–762,
766–767
of hydration, 928
irreversible processes and, 779
molecular structure and, 766
as organizing force, 756
positional, 754–755, 756,
762–764, 771
pressure dependence of, 771
second law of thermodynamics
and, 755–756, 762, 779
sign of change in, 758–759
of solution, 754
standard values, 764–765,
A19–A22

A75

temperature and, 764
of vaporization, 756–757
Enzymes, 557, 558, 562–563
Ephedrine, 648
Equation of state, 187. See also
Ideal gas law
Equations. See Chemical
equations; Linear equations;
Quadratic equations
Equilibrium, 579–582
deﬁnition of, 579
entropy and, 755, 761
free energy and, 761, 766, 770,
773–778
heterogeneous, 588–590
homogeneous, 588
of liquid and vapor, 459–460
reaction rates and, 581–582,
593, 606
Equilibrium constant (K),
582–586
for complex ion formation,
731–734
extent of reaction and, 592–593
free energy and, 775, 777–778
for heterogeneous equilibria,
588–590
pressures in, 586–588,
594–596, 601–603
reaction quotient and,
593–594, 605
for redox reactions, 807–808
small, 603–604
for sum of reactions, 734
temperature dependence of,
605, 609–610, 777–778
units in, 583, 584
Equilibrium expression, 582–584
for heterogeneous
equilibrium, 589
with pressures, 586–588,
594–596, 601–603
Equilibrium point, 774, 775
Equilibrium position, 585–586,
591–592, 774
Le Châtelier’s principle and,
604–610
in solubility equilibrium,
717–718
Equilibrium problems, 600–604.
See also Acid–base
equilibrium problems;
Solubility
calculating concentrations,
596–599, 600–601, 603–604
calculating pressures, 594–596,
601–603
pictorial example, 591–592
reaction quotient in, 593–594,
600, 605, 607
with small K, 603–604
summary of procedure, 600

A76

Index

Equilibrium vapor pressure, 460,
465. See also Vapor pressure
of solution, 497–498
Equivalence point, 151–152, 696
determination of, 711–716
strong acid–strong base, 698,
699, 705
strong base–strong acid, 699
weak acid–strong base, 702,
703, 704, 705, 706, 707
weak base–strong acid, 709,
710, 711
Equivalent mass, 487, 488
Erements, Mikhail, 358
Error, 12–13, A10
Error limit, A10, A11, A12
Erythropoietin (EPO), 978–979
Esters, 1015
Estimation. See Uncertainty in
measurement
Ethane, 998
Ethanol, 1011–1012, 1014
from fermentation,
258–259, 263, 891,
1011–1012
as fuel, 263, 1012
hydrogen bonding in, 428
as nonelectrolyte, 133
solubility in water, 129
vapor pressure, 461
Ethylene
hydrogenation, 558–559, 998
polymers based on, 1017–1019,
1021–1022
structure, 393–395, 1005
synthesis, 1004
Ethylenediamine (en), 957,
959, 968
Ethylenediaminetetraacetate
(EDTA), 957
Ethylene glycol, 1012
Ethyl group, 1000
Evaporation, 459. See also
Vaporization; Vapor pressure
Evaporative cooling, 459, 514
Exact numbers, 13
Excited state
of hydrogen atom, 284, 286,
287, 296
of nucleus, 844
Excluded-volume force, 756
Exclusion principle, 298, 302, 303
Exothermic process, 231–232
enthalpy change, 236
entropy change, 757–759,
760–761
equilibrium constant, 609–610
spontaneity and, 750–751,
760–761
Experimental error, 10–13,
A10–A13
Experiments, 5, 6, 199, 200

Explosives
detector for, 455
in ﬁreworks, 288
nitrogen-based, 7, 358, 410,
455, 582, 904–905, 911, 1016
Exponential notation, 13–14,
A1–A3
Exponentiation, A5
Extensive property
enthalpy change, 238, 243–244
entropy, 764
Extinction coefﬁcient, A17–A19
Extinctions, 1, 51, 80
Face-centered cubic unit cell, 433,
436, 437, 438–441, 456–457
Fahrenheit scale, 19–23
Families. See Groups
Faraday (F), 801
Faraday, Michael, 801
Fats. See Oils
Fat-soluble vitamins, 492–493
Feldspar, 448
Fermentation, 258, 263, 891,
1011–1012
Ferrate ion, 959
Ferric ion, 59
Ferrochrome, 951
Ferrous ion, 59
Ferrovanadium, 950
Fertilizers, 7, 906, 910, 911,
917, 922
Filtration, 26
Fire extinguishers, 471
Firewalking, 241
Fireworks, 277, 278, 288–289
First ionization energy, 309, 310,
311–312, 316, 317
First law of thermodynamics, 232,
233, 749
First-order radioactive decay, 847
First-order reaction, 535
half-life, 541–543, 545
integrated rate law, 538–543, 548
pseudo-ﬁrst-order, 547
Fisher, Mel, 820
Fission, nuclear, 843,
859–863, 866
5% rule, 637, 638
Flame test, 729, 731
Flask, volumetric, 10, 136,
137, 139
Flat-panel display, 282–283
Fleming, Alexander, 90
Flotation process, 980, 983
Fluorapatite, 717, 720, 916
Fluoride, tooth decay and,
717, 720
Fluorine, 304, 924–930. See also
Hydrogen ﬂuoride
in chloroﬂuorocarbons, 561,
1003–1004

molecular structure, 355, 409,
410, 878
oxidation state, 156
Fluxes, 983, 984, 985
Foecke, Tim, 445
f orbitals, 294, 295, 297, 299
in lanthanides and actinides,
306, 943, 949
Forces. See also Intermolecular
forces
bonding and, 332, 347, 348
electromagnetic, 864, 865
electrostatic, 426, 514–515, 863
entropic, 756
fundamental, 864, 865
gravitational, 10, 180, 211,
864, 865
nuclear, 863, 864
potential energy and, 230
pressure and, 181, 233,
A14–A16
work and, 230
Formal charge, 363–367
Formaldehyde, 1013
Formation constants, 731–734
Formula, chemical, 52
determination of, 91–96
from name, 59
Formula, structural, 52, 53
Formula equation, 145, 146
Forward bias, 451, 452
Fossil fuels, 229, 253–254. See
also Air pollution; Coal;
Gasoline; Natural gas;
Petroleum
carbon dioxide from, 179, 229,
255, 891
Fractional charge. See Partial
charge
Francium, 316
Frasch process, 920
Free energy, 759–762
cell potential and, 802, 804, 805
in chemical reactions, 766–770,
771–777, 802
equilibrium and, 761, 766, 770,
773–778
pressure dependence of,
770–773, 774–777
spontaneity and, 759–762, 770,
773–774, 778
work and, 778–779, 802, 805
Free energy of formation,
standard, 769, 772, A19–A22
Free radical, 1019
Freezing, 26
free energy change, 760
Freezing point, 466, 469. See also
Melting point
Freezing-point depression, 504,
505, 506–507, 512, 513
Freons, 561, 1003–1004

Frequency, 275–276, 277,
278–280
Frequency factor, 555
Frictional heating, 230
by electric current, 778,
793, 801
of ice, 469
Fructose, 515, 1031, 1032,
1033, 1034
Fry, Art, 7
Fuel cells, 812–813
Fullerenes, 80–81, 891
Functional groups, 1010
Fusion, nuclear, 850–851,
859, 863
Galena, 161, 893, 920, 955
Galileo, 7, 180
Gallium, 305, 888, 889, 890
Gallium arsenide, 279
Galvani, Luigi, 794
Galvanic cells, 791–793. See also
Batteries; Cell potential;
Fuel cells
compared to electrolytic
cells, 816
complete description, 798–800
concentration cells, 804
corrosion compared to, 815
efﬁciency of, 801
line notation for, 798
standard reduction potentials,
794–800, 948, A25
Galvanizing, 815, 928, 955
Gamma rays, 48, 844, 864, 865
Gangue, 978, 980, 982
Gas constant (R), 187, 204–205
Gases. See also Atmosphere; Ideal
gas; Kinetic molecular
theory; Pressure;
Vaporization
acid–base reactions in, 625–626
Avogadro’s hypothesis, 44
Avogadro’s law, 185–186, 202
Boyle’s law, 181–184, 186,
189, 200–201
Charles’s law, 184–185, 186,
189, 201
in chemical equations, 98
collected over water, 198–199
compression of, 233, 234
Dalton’s law of partial
pressures, 194–199, 202
diffusion of, 206, 207–208
early studies of, 40–41, 44–45
effusion of, 206–207
equilibria with, 586–588,
594–596, 601–603, 607–608
expansion of, 233–235
fundamental properties of,
25, 179
mixing of, 206, 207–208

Index
mixtures of, 194–199, 202
molar concentration of, 586,
587, 588
molar mass of, 193–194
molar volume of, 190–191
positional entropy of, 754–755,
756, 762–763, 771
real, 182–184, 187, 191, 200,
205, 208–211, 879
separation of, 196
solubility of, 493–495, 496
solutions of, 485
standard state, 246
standard temperature and
pressure, 191
state of, 187
stoichiometry of, 190–194
velocity distribution in,
205–206, 553–554
work performed by, 233–235
Gasohol, 263, 1012
Gasoline, 253
air pollution and, 211–213
combustion, 252, 778, 779
compared to hydrogen, 261
lead in, 253–254, 893
from methanol, 257
octane rating, 103
Gay-Lussac, Joseph, 44–45
Geiger–Müller counter, 852
Gemstones, 970–971
Gene, 1038
Genetic damage, 864
Geometrical isomerism, 961, 963,
965, 1006
Germanium, 300, 301, 890, 891,
892, 894
Germer, L. H., 282
Geubelle, Philippe, 1018
Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 759
Glass
capillary action in, 429
cleaning solution for, 953
etched with acid, 928
metallic, 449
photochromic, 931
structure of, 432, 447–448
titanium dioxide on, 951
Glass electrode, 807
Global warming, 179, 229,
255–256, 910
Glucose, 891, 1011–1012,
1033, 1034
Gluons, 864
Glycerol, 429–430
Glycogen, 1034, 1036
Glycoside linkages, 1034,
1035–1036
Gold, 433, 814, 821, 955,
981, 982
in plants, 40
Golf clubs, 449

Goodyear, Charles, 1017
Goudsmit, Samuel, 296
Graduated cylinder, 11, 12–13
Grafting, onto polymer, 1025
Graham, Thomas, 206
Graham’s law, 206–207
Grams, 9, 83
Graphing functions, A6–A7
Graphite, 332–333, 443,
444–446, 891
diamond and, 244, 246, 446,
470–471, 768–769
entropy of, 764
Gravitational force, 10, 864, 865
atmosphere and, 180, 211
Gray tin, 892
Greenhouse effect, 255–256,
495, 910
Ground state, 286, 287, 290, 296
Groundwater clean-up, 156–157
Group 1A. See Alkali metals;
Hydrogen
Group 2A. See Alkaline earth
metals
Group 3A, 876, 888–890. See
also Aluminum; Boron
Group 4A, 876–878, 890–894.
See also Carbon; Lead;
Silicon
Group 5A, 878, 901–903. See
also Nitrogen; Phosphorus
Group 6A, 878, 918. See also
Oxygen; Selenium; Sulfur
Group 7A. See Halogens
Group 8A. See Noble gases
Groups, 55, 307
alternate designations for, 57,
307–308
atomic radii and, 313, 314
chemical properties of, 308, 314
electron afﬁnities in, 313
ionization energies in, 310
names for, 55, 315
of transition metals, 307,
943–944
valence electrons and, 304–305,
307, 308, 314
Guericke, Otto von, 180
Guldberg, Cato Maximilian, 582
Gutierrez, Sidney M., 105
Gypsum, 213, 892, 916, 920
Haber, Fritz, 582, 604
Haber process, 906. See also
Ammonia synthesis
equilibrium, 583–584, 604–606
hydrogen for, 106, 883
reaction rate, 527, 558, 582
Hadrons, 864
Hafnium, 308–309, 949
Half-cell potentials, 794–800. See
also Cell potential

Half-life
of radioactive sample, 847–849
of reactant, 541–543, 545–546
of transuranium elements, 851
Half-reactions
electrochemical, 791–792,
794–800
oxidation–reduction, 162–168
Hall, Charles M., 822, 889
Hall–Heroult process, 822, 889
Halogenation of hydrocarbons,
1003–1004, 1008
Halogens (Group 7A), 55,
924–930. See also
Hydrochloric acid; Hydrogen
ﬂuoride
atomic radii, 878
electron afﬁnities, 313
hydrogen halides of, 628, 661,
925–928
interhalogen compounds, 930
as ligands, 958, 968
oxyacids of, 67, 928–929
phosphorus compounds with,
917–918
sulfur compounds with, 924
Hassium, 57
Heat. See also Endothermic
process; Exothermic process;
Frictional heating;
Temperature
calorimetry and, 237–242
coagulation by, 515
conductivity of, in metals, 436,
441, 442, 944
at constant pressure, 235–236,
237–240, 243
at constant volume, 240–242
electricity from, 810–811
as energy, 229, 232, 749
entropy changes and,
757–759, 762
sign of, 232, 233
state functions and, 231
temperature and, 230
as wasted energy, 778, 779,
801, 810–811
work done by gas and,
234–235
Heat capacity, 237–238,
239, 241
Heating curve, 463–464
Heat of fusion, 425, 464
Heat of hydration, 491, 927, 928
Heat of reaction, 236.
See also Enthalpy
Heat of solution, 489–492, 496,
502, 503
Heat of vaporization, 425, 426
deﬁnition of, 459
vapor pressure and, 461–463
Heat radiation, 254–255

A77

Heisenberg, Werner, 290, 291
Heisenberg uncertainty principle,
291–292, 296
Helium, 302, 931, 932
in buckyballs, 80
Lewis structure, 354
molecular orbital model, 406
Schrödinger equation
for, 298
stellar fusion and, 850, 863
Helium nucleus. See Alpha (␣)
particles
␣-Helix, 1028, 1029
Hematite, 982
Heme, 973–975
Hemoglobin, 756, 975–979
Hemolysis, 510
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation,
689, 695, 713–714
Henry’s law, 494–495, 497
Heroult, Paul, 822, 889
Hertz (Hz), 276
Hess’s law, 242–246, 247, 767
Heterogeneous catalysis, 558–559
Heterogeneous equilibria,
588–590
Heterogeneous mixture, 25
Heteronuclear diatomic molecules,
412–413
Hexadentate ligand, 957
Hexagonal closest packed (hcp)
structure, 436, 437, 438, 441,
442, 456
Hexahydro-1,3,5-triazine
(RDX), 455
Hexoses, 1031, 1032
High-altitude sickness, 977
High-spin case, 968, 971, 972
Hill, Julian, 1017
Hole
in closest packed structure,
456–458
in semiconductor, 450–451
Homogeneous catalysis, 558,
559–563
Homogeneous equilibria, 588
Homogeneous mixture, 25. See
also Solutions
Homonuclear diatomic molecules,
406–412
Homopolymer, 1020
Human body. See also Biologic
systems
aging of, 160–161
boron requirement, 889
elements in, 879
knee prosthesis, 431
radioactivity applications, 847,
855–856
selenium in, 47, 918
transition metals in, 973–977
Hund’s rule, 303

A78

Index

Hybridization, 391–403
in alkanes, 998
dsp3 orbitals, 397–399
d 2sp3 orbitals, 399–400
in complex ions, 966–967
in Group 4A, 890, 891
in Group 5A, 902, 903
sp orbitals, 395–397
sp2 orbitals, 393–395
sp3 orbitals, 391–393
summary, 401
Hydration
of alkali metal ions, 318, 881
of aluminum ions, 659, 661,
664–665, 666, 889
of concrete, 892
enthalpy of, 491, 927, 928
entropy of, 928
of halide ions, 927–928
of ions in solution, 128–129, 130
of protons, 624, 629
of solids, 213
Hydrazine, 907–909
Hydride ion, 340, 884
Hydrides, 427–428, 883–885, 918
of boron, 245, 888
metallic, 262, 884–885
of nitrogen, 906–909
Hydrocarbon derivatives,
1010–1016
Hydrocarbons. See also Benzene;
Ethylene; Methane
aromatic, 1008–1010
in petroleum, 253
saturated, 997–1005
unsaturated, 997–998, 1004,
1005–1010
Hydrochloric acid, 131, 627, 927,
928. See also Hydrogen
chloride
in aqua regia, 735, 803
Br$nsted-Lowry model,
625–626
pH calculations, 634–635
Hydrocyanic acid, 657, 705–707
Hydroﬂuoric acid, 926–928.
See also Hydrogen ﬂuoride
with common ion, 681–683
pH calculations, 636–637
Hydrogen, 883–885
bonding in, 331–332, 354,
403–405, 406
in early universe, 850
entropy of, 765–766
as fuel, 257–262, 812, 813, 885
as nonmetal, 55, 316, 876
oxidation state, 156
preparation of, 880, 883
as real gas, 208, 210–211
as reducing agent, 879, 980
in syngas, 256–257
in water, 3–4

Hydrogenation, 558–559, 883,
998, 1007
Hydrogen atom
atomic radius, 876
Bohr model, 285–287, 290,
291, 292, 293
emission spectrum,
284–285, 290
orbital diagram, 302
quantum mechanical model,
290–296
summary, 296
Hydrogen bonding, 426–428
in alcohols, 428, 1010
in ammonia, 907
boiling points and, 427–428
in hydrazine, 907
in hydrogen ﬂuoride, 926
in molecular solids, 454, 456
in nonideal solution, 502, 504
in nucleic acids, 1038, 1039
in nylon, 1017
in proteins, 1028, 1030
solubility and, 490, 491
viscosity and, 430
in water, 426–427, 454, 456,
459, 461, 464, 490, 491, 884
Hydrogen bromide, 927
Hydrogen chloride. See also
Hydrochloric acid
dipole moment, 337
Hydrogen–chlorine cannon, 926
Hydrogen cyanide. See also
Cyanide ion
from millipede, 379
Hydrogen electrode, 794
Hydrogen ﬂuoride, 636–637, 661,
925–928
bonding in, 332–333,
335–336, 413
with common ion, 681–683
Hydrogen halides, 628, 661,
925–928. See also
Hydrochloric acid; Hydrogen
ﬂuoride
Hydrogen iodide, 927
Hydrogen ions. See also pH;
Protons
from autoionization of water,
629–631
in deﬁnition of acid, 131, 149,
623, 664
Hydrogenlike orbitals, 299, 302
Hydrogen peroxide, 159, 881, 975
Hydrogen sulﬁde, 338, 923
Hydrogen sulﬁtes, 922
Hydrohalic acids, 628, 661,
926–928. See also
Hydrochloric acid; Hydrogen
ﬂuoride
Hydrometallurgy, 981–982
Hydronium ion, 623–624, 626, 629

Hydrophilic side chains, 1027
Hydrophilic substances, 492
Hydrophobic side chains, 1027
Hydrophobic substances, 492
Hydrostatic pressure.
See Osmotic pressure
Hydroxide ion
in Arrhenius base, 131, 149,
623, 644
from autoionization of water,
629–631
buffering and, 685–686,
690–691, 692–693
ionic oxides and, 663, 876
as Lewis base, 664
pOH and, 631–632,
633–634, 648
in salt solutions, 656–657
as strong base, 131, 149
weak bases and, 132–133,
646–650
Hydroxides
of alkali metals, 318, 644
of alkaline earth metals,
644–645, 724, 885
solubility in water, 144
Hydroxo ligand, 958, 968
Hydroxyapatite, 159, 717, 720
Hydroxyl group, 1010
Hydroxyl radical, 212, 213, 1019
Hyperbola, 182
Hypochlorite ion, 638, 643, 929
Hypochlorous acid, 628, 638, 929
Hypoﬂuorous acid, 929
Hypophosphorous acid, 917
Hypothesis, 5–6, 7
Ice, 25, 26, 425
biology and, 22–23, 516
density of, 425, 426, 469
freezing-point depression,
506–507
melting of, 425, 426, 463–464,
760–761
on phase diagram, 467–469
structure of, 435, 454, 456, 884
sublimation of, 467–468, 469
supercooled water and, 466, 516
vapor pressure, 465
ICE table, 640
Ideal gas
deﬁnition of, 183, 187
expansion into vacuum,
751–754
free energy of, 771–772
kinetic molecular theory of,
199–206, 207, 208, A13–A16
molar volume of, 190–191
partial pressure of, 194–196
Ideal gas law, 186–190
derivation of, 202–204,
A13–A16

molar mass and, 193–194
molar volume and, 190–191
Ideal solution, 502, 503
Ilmenite, 950
Independent variable, A6
Indeterminate error, 12, A10
Indicators, acid–base, 151–152,
711–716
Indium, 300, 888, 890
Inert-atmosphere box, 903
Inert gases, 373. See also
Noble gases
equilibrium and, 607
nitrogen as, 903
Infrared radiation, 276
from earth’s surface,
254–255, 910
imaging with, 279
in thermophotovoltaics, 810
Initial rates, method of,
535–538, 548
Ink, electronic, 488–489
Insoluble solids, 143, 735
Instantaneous rate, 530
Insulator, electrical, 444
Integers, in calculations, 13
Integrated rate law, 533, 534,
538–547, 548–549
ﬁrst-order, 538–543
for radioactive decay, 854–855
second-order, 543–546
with several reactants,
546–547, 549
zero-order, 546
Integration, 539
Intensive property, 238
reduction potential as, 797
Intercept, A6, A7
Interference of waves, 282, 432
Interhalogen compounds, 930
Intermediate, 549
Intermolecular forces, 426–429.
See also Hydrogen bonding;
London dispersion forces
changes of state and, 464
in Group 8A solids, 436
in liquid–liquid solutions,
502, 504
in liquids, 429–430, 460–461
in molecular solids, 454–456
in proteins, 1030
in real gas, 200, 209, 210–211
solubility and, 489
vapor pressure and, 460–461
Internal energy, 232–236
Interstitial alloys, 443, 986
Interstitial (metallic) hydrides,
262, 884–885
Intramolecular bonding, 426
Inverse relationship, 182
Iodide salts, solubility, 144
Iodine, 924–927, 928, 929–930

Index
sublimation of, 463
triiodide ion, 361, 375,
398–399
Iodine-131, 855
Ion exchange, 887
Ionic bonds, 53–55, 330, 335
percent ionic character,
346–347
in proteins, 1030
Ionic compounds (salts), 53–55.
See also Binary ionic
compounds; Crystalline
solids; Solubility
acid–base properties, 655–660
in buffered solutions, 684, 688
common ions from, 681–683,
718, 722–724
coordination compounds as, 955
crystal structures, 344, 435,
436, 456–458
as electrolytes, 129–131, 145,
435, 512–513
formation of, 342–346
insoluble, 143, 735
Lewis structures, 354
molten, 347, 348
naming of, 59–63, 65–66
oxidation states in, 156
polyatomic ions in, 55, 62–63,
65, 66–67, 346
predicting formulas of,
339–340
radii of ions in, 340–342
Ionic equation, 145–146, 150
Ionic hydrides, 883–884
Ionic liquids, 494–495
Ionic radii, 340–342
Ionic solids, 55, 339, 435, 436,
456–458. See also Ionic
compounds (salts)
Ion interchange, 144
Ionization, of strong
electrolytes, 130
Ionization energies, 309–312,
315, 316
of transition metals, 948
Ionizing radiation, 864–865
Ion pairing, 512–513
Ion-product constant (Kw),
629–631, 632–633, 656
Ion product (Q), 725, 727
Ions, 53–54. See also Anions;
Cations; Complex ions;
Electrolytes; Hydration
charges on, 59, 60, 61, 157
in colloid, 514, 515
concentrations of, 134–135
energy of interaction, 330
naming of, 59, 60, 61, 62, 66–67
oxidation states of, 156, 157
polyatomic, 55, 62–63, 65,
66–67, 346

selective precipitation of,
727–731, 734–736,
981, 982
sizes of, 340–342
Ion-selective electrodes, 807
Iridium, 1, 51, 80, 81, 949
Iron, 305, 878, 947, 954.
See also Steel
in biologic systems, 973–977
corrosion of, 776–777, 813,
814–816, 954
crystalline forms, 986
in magnetorheological ﬂuid, 431
metallurgy of, 982–984
for water clean-up, 156–157
Iron oxides, 158, 982–983, 984
Iron pyrite, 982
Irreversible process, 779
Isoelectronic ions, 341–342, 344
Isomerism, 960–965
alkanes, 998–1000, 1001–1002
alkenes, 1006
complex ions, 960–965
sugars, 1031–1032, 1034
Isotactic chains, 1023, 1024
Isotonic solutions, 510–511
Isotopes, 50, 51, 79, 80–81,
84, 841
Jacobson, Joseph M., 488, 489
Johnson, William L., 449
Joliot, Frederick, 849
Jorgensen, Sophus Mads, 960
Joule (J), 205, 233, 801
Juglone, 86, 379
Juhl, Daniel, 258
Junction potential, 451
Junction transistor, 452
K. See Equilibrium constant
Ka. See Acid dissociation constant
Kb, 646
calculating from Ka, 656
for common weak bases,
646–647, A23
pH of salt solutions and,
659–660
Kp, 586–588, 594–595, 601–603
Ksp, 717–724, 725–729, A24
Kw, 629–631, 632–633, 656
Kairomones, 379
Kaolinite, 448
Kelvin temperature, 19–22
absolute zero of, 185, 764
Charles’s law and, 185, 201
ideal gas law and, 190
kinetic energy and, 200,
203, 204
Kerogen, 262–263
Kerosene, 253
Ketones, 1013–1014
Kinetic energy, 230

bonding and, 331
internal energy and, 232
reaction rates and, 553
temperature and, 200, 203, 204,
206, 461
Kinetic molecular theory (KMT),
199–206
effusion and, 207
quantitative, A13–A16
reaction rates and, 552
real gases and, 200, 208
Kinetics of chemical reactions.
See Rate laws; Reaction
mechanisms; Reaction rates
Kinetics of nuclear decay,
846–849
Kinetic stability, of nucleus,
841–849
Knee prosthesis, 431
Krypton, 305, 932
Kuznick, Steven, 196
Lake Nyos tragedy, 497
Lanthanide contraction, 949
Lanthanide series, 306, 308, 875,
943, 949
Lasers, 87, 863
Lattice, 432, 435, 436
Lattice energy, 342, 343, 344–346
Lavoisier, Antoine, 7, 41, 275,
288, 821
Law of conservation of energy,
229, 232, 749
Law of conservation of mass, 6,
41, 98
Law of deﬁnite proportion, 41
Law of mass action, 582, 585,
589, 593, 600
solubility and, 717
Law of multiple proportions, 42–43
Law of nature, 6, 199
Leaching, 981–982
Lead, 890, 891, 893, 894
in gasoline, 253–254, 893
metallurgy of, 51, 161–162,
879, 893, 981
in peat bogs, 51
radioactive decay to, 854–855
Leading zeros, 13, 14
Lead poisoning, 1, 893, 957
Lead salts, solubility of, 144
Lead storage batteries, 24,
808–810, 893, 922
Le Châtelier’s principle, 604–610
common ion effect and, 682
for concentration, 605–607, 803
for pressure, 607–609, 773
for temperature, 609–610
Leclanché, George, 810
Lee, David S., 449
LE model. See Localized electron
(LE) model

A79

Length, units of, 9, 16–19, A26
LEO says GER, 160
Lepidolite, 880
Leptons, 864
Leucippus, 39, 275
Levanon, Baruch, 809
Levorotatory isomer, 964–965
Lewis, G. N., 348, 354, 663
Lewis acid–base model, 663–665
of complex ions, 731, 945,
956, 966
Group 4A elements and, 890
Group 5A elements and, 902
Lewis structures, 354–358
exceptions to octet rule,
358–361
formal charge and, 363–367
in localized electron model,
354, 358, 360, 400
odd-electron molecules and, 363
resonance of, 362–367, 413
in VSEPR model, 369, 377
Libby, Willard, 853
Ligands, 731, 945, 955, 956–960.
See also Complex ions
in biology, 973, 977
coordination number and,
731, 956
deﬁnition of, 956
as Lewis bases, 731, 945,
956, 966
naming of, 958
spectrochemical series, 968
Light. See also Colors;
Electromagnetic radiation
diffraction of, 281
dual nature of, 280–281
dyes and, 277
in photography, 926
polarized, 961–962, 1032
quantization of, 278–280, 285
scattering of, 514
in scintillation counter,
852–853
smog and, 213
spectroscopy with, A16–A19
spectrum of, 284–285
speed of, 275–276, 280
titanium dioxide and, 951
“Like dissolves like,” 129,
489, 491
Lime. See Calcium oxide
Lime boil, 985
Lime–soda process, 645
Limestone. See also Calcium
carbonate
acid rain and, 212–213
caverns in, 681, 724
in iron metallurgy, 983–984
in Portland cement, 892
for scrubbing, 214
in steelmaking, 985

A80

Index

Limiting reactant, 106–113
in solution, 147–148
Limiting reagent, 108
Linear complex ions, 956,
966, 973
Linear equations, A6–A7
Linear model, of radiation
damage, 866
Linear structure, 367, 371, 372,
375, 401, 402
Line notation, 798
Line spectrum, 285
Linkage isomerism, 961
Liquefaction of air, 879–880, 919
Liquid–liquid solutions, 501–504
Liquids. See also Solutions; Vapor
pressure
in chemical equations, 98
fundamental properties of, 25,
425, 429–430
in heterogeneous equilibria, 589
intermolecular forces in,
429–430, 460–461
ionic, 494–495
magnetorheological ﬂuids, 431
positional entropy of, 754
standard state, 246
structural model for, 430
superheated, 466
Liter (L), 9
Lithium, 302, 316, 317–318,
880–881, 882. See also
Alkali metals
atomic radius, 318, 876
manic depressive disease and,
1, 882
molecular orbital model,
406–407
Lobes, of orbitals, 295
Localized electron (LE) model,
353–354
combined with MO model,
413–415
of complex ions, 965–967
hybrid orbitals in, 391–403
Lewis structures and, 354, 358,
360, 400
limitations of, 403
odd-electron molecules
and, 363
resonance and, 362–363,
413–415
summary of, 400–403
Logarithms, 631, A4–A6
London dispersion forces,
428–429
in ethane, 1010
in Group 8A solids, 436
in molecular solids, 454
in oil, 490
in proteins, 1030
vapor pressure and, 461

Lone pairs
formal charge and, 364, 366
in hydrogen bonding, 427
in localized electron model,
353, 354, 355, 356
in VSEPR model, 370–371,
375, 376–377
Lowry, Thomas M., 149, 623
Low-spin case, 968
Macroscopic world, 2–3
Maentyranta, Eero, 978, 979
Magic numbers, 843
Magnesium, 304, 442, 885,
886–888
for cathodic protection, 816
Magnesium hydroxide, 105–106,
644–645, 724
Magnesium oxide, 344–346
Magnetic moment, 296, 298
Magnetic quantum number, 294
Magnetism. See also
Diamagnetism;
Paramagnetism
in metallurgy, 982–983
Magnetite, 158, 982
Magnetorheological ﬂuid, 431
Maillard, Louis-Camille, 1032
Maillard reaction, 1032
Main-group elements.
See Representative elements
Major species, 634–635, 636, 637,
666, 667
Malleability, 55, 436, 441, 443
Manganese, 305, 947, 953
Manic depressive disease, 1, 882
Manometer, 180–181
Marble, acid rain and, 212–213
Mass. See also Density;
Molar mass
atomic, 44–45, 46, 78–81,
82, 300
average, 77–78
compared to weight, 9–10
conservation of, 6, 41, 98
deﬁnition of, 10
in deﬁnition of matter, 25
effusion of gases and, 206–207
energy associated with, 280,
844, 856–857, 864
equivalent, 487, 488
measurement of, 10, 11, 12
of reactants and products,
102–106
units of, 9, 16, A26
Mass action. See Law of mass
action
Mass defect, 857, 858–859
Mass number (A), 50, 52,
841, 842
Mass percent, 89–91
of solute, 485, 486, 488

Mass spectrometric measurement
of atomic mass, 78–79
of Avogadro’s number, 82
of isotopic composition,
80–81, 84
of molar mass, 87
for radiocarbon dating, 854
Matches, 914–915
Matrix-assisted laser desorption, 87
Matter, 25–28
quantum nature of, 277–284
McMillan, Edwin M., 302
Mean, A11
Mean free path, 205
Measurement
of mass, 10, 11, 12
of temperature, 19–23
uncertainty in, 10–13, 16,
A10–A13
units of, 5, 8–10, 16–19, A26
of volume, 9, 10–13
Measuring pipet, 137, 139
Mechanisms, reaction, 527,
549–552
Median, A11
Medicine. See Human body
Melting, 463–464
of ice, 425, 426, 463–464,
468–469, 760–761
Melting point, 464, 465, 466.
See also Freezing point
depression; Phase diagrams
Mendeleev, Dmitri Ivanovich,
300, 301, 304, 314
Meniscus, 10, 429
Mercury
convex meniscus of, 429
salts of, solubility, 144
toxicity of, 893, 975
Mercury barometer,
180–181, 460
Mercury cell, 811, 825–826
Mercury manometer, 180–181
Messenger RNA (mRNA),
1038–1039, 1040
Metal ions. See also Complex
ions; Hydration; Ions
naming of, 58, 59, 60, 61
selective precipitation of,
727–731, 734–736,
981, 982
Metallic glasses, 449
Metallic hydrides, 262, 884–885
Metallic radii, 313
Metalloids, 316, 875, 890.
See also Silicon
Metallurgy, 39, 879, 978–982
electroreﬁning, 823–824
of iron, 982–984
of lead, 51, 161–162, 879,
893, 981
Metal plating. See Electroplating

Metals. See also Alloys;
Corrosion; Ores; Transition
metals
bonding in, 441–442, 458
bonding with nonmetals,
339, 945
crystal structures, 433, 435,
436–441
in periodic table, 55, 315, 316,
875, 876
physical properties, 55, 436,
441, 442, 944–945
as reducing agents, 316–318,
881, 948
Meter (m), 9, 18–19
Methane
bond energies, 350
bond polarities, 338
from coal gasiﬁcation, 256
combustion of, 812–813
as greenhouse gas, 255, 256
halogenated, 1003–1004
hydrogen derived from, 883
in natural gas, 196,
253–254, 258
as real gas, 208, 210–211
structure of, 52–53, 347, 349,
368, 391–392, 998
Methanol, 1010–1011
combustion of, 252
as fuel, 257, 263, 1011
hydrogen bonding in,
428, 1010
preparation of, 111–112
VSEPR model, 377
Method of initial rates,
535–538, 548
Methylamine ligand, 958
Methylene group, 998
Methyl group, 1000
Metric system, 8–10, 16–19
Meyer, Julius Lothar, 300
Microchip laboratories, 138
Microelectronics, 47, 452–453
Microencapsulation, 488–489
Microscope, scanning tunneling
(STM), 2, 438–439
Microscopic world, 3
Microstates, 752, 753, 754
Microwave radiation, 276
Milk of magnesia, 105–106, 724
Millikan, Robert, 47–48
Milliliter (mL), 9, 10–13
Millimole (mmol), 696
Mineral acids, 131. See also
Nitric acid; Sulfuric acid
Minerals, 978
Minor species, 635
Minton, Allen, 756
Mirror image isomers, 963–965,
1031–1032, 1034
Mixing, of gases, 206, 207–208

Index
Mixtures, 25, 485. See also
Colloids; Solutions
entropy and, 754
of gases, 194–199, 202
separation of, 25–27, 196
mm Hg, 181
Mobile phase, 27
Models, 6, 199–200, 348–350.
See also Localized electron
(LE) model; Molecular
orbital (MO) model; VSEPR
model
ball-and-stick, 53, 55
chemical bond as, 347–350
for chemical kinetics, 552–557
kinetic molecular theory as,
200, 208
space-ﬁlling, 52–53
Moderator, 861
Molal boiling-point elevation
constant, 505
Molal freezing-point depression
constant, 505, 506
Molality (m), 486, 488
Molar concentration of a gas, 586,
587, 588
Molar heat capacity, 237
Molarity (M), 133–140, 485,
486, 487
in mmol per mL, 697
temperature and, 486
Molar mass, 86–88
from boiling-point
elevation, 505
from freezing-point
depression, 507
of ideal gas, 193–194
from osmotic pressure,
508–509
from Raoult’s law, 499
vapor pressure and, 461
Molar volume, of ideal gas,
190–191
Mole, 82–85
of electrons, 801
of gas, 186, 187, 202
Molecular formula, 93–96
Molecularity, 550
Molecular orbital (MO) model,
403–406
of benzene, 414–415, 1008
combined with LE model,
413–415
of diamond, 443–444
of diatomic molecules, 406–413
of graphite, 444–446
of metals, 441–442
of nitric oxide, 412, 910
paramagnetism and,
409–410, 412
of silicon, 450, 451
Molecular sieve, 196

Molecular solids, 435, 436,
454–456, 458
Molecular structure, 367. See also
VSEPR model
in biologic systems, 378
standard entropy and, 766
Molecular weight, 86, 193
Molecules, 52–53
Mole fraction, 195–198, 485, 486
Mole ratio, 103–106
with limiting reactant, 110, 111,
112, 113
Molybdenum, 949
Momentum
in kinetic theory, A14–A15
uncertainty principle and,
291–292
Monatomic gases, 55
Monatomic ions
names of, 58, 59, 60, 61
oxidation states of, 156
Monoclinic sulfur, 920
Monodentate ligand, 956, 958
Monomers, 1016
Monoprotic acids, 628, A22
Monosaccharides, 1031–1034.
See also Glucose
Moore, Jeffrey, 1018
Multiple bonds, 351, 375–376.
See also Double bonds;
Triple bonds
Multiple proportions, law of,
42–43
Multiplication
in exponential notation, A2
signiﬁcant ﬁgures, 14, 15
Myoglobin, 973–975, 1029
Names of compounds, 57–67
acids, 66–67, 1014
alcohols, 1010, 1012–1013
aldehydes, 1013
alkanes, 1000–1003, 1005
alkenes, 1005
alkynes, 1006
amines, 1015
benzene derivatives, 1009
binary covalent, 63–65
binary ionic, 58–61, 65–66
carboxylic acids, 1014
coordination compounds,
958–959
cyclic alkanes, 1005
esters, 1015
formulas from, 59
ketones, 1013
with polyatomic ions, 62–63,
65, 66–67
Names of groups, 55, 315, 1010
Names of ions, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62,
65, 66–67
Nanoscale devices, 439

Natta, Giulio, 1022
Natural gas, 196, 252–254, 258.
See also Methane
Natural law, 6, 199
Natural logarithms, A5–A6, A7
Neon, 304, 355, 411, 932
Nernst, Walther Hermann, 805
Nernst equation, 804–806
Net ionic equation, 145–146, 150
Network solids, 436,
443–454, 458
Neutralization analysis, 153–154
Neutralization reactions, 150–151
enthalpy change in, 237–238
Neutralization titration, 153
Neutral solutions, 630
of salts, 655, 659, 660
Neutrons, 49–50, 52, 841, 864
in chain reaction, 860–861
in nuclear transformation,
850–851, 852
in radioactive decay, 842–844
Newlands, John, 300
Newton (unit of force), 181
Newton, Isaac, 275
Nickel, 305, 815, 947, 954
Nickel–cadmium battery, 811
Nicotine, 379
Night vision equipment, 279
Niobium, 1, 949
Nitrate ion, 55, 362–363,
375–376, 413, 415
Nitrate salts, 144, 906, 913
Nitric acid, 131, 627, 911–913
in air pollution, 212, 922
in aqua regia, 735, 803
Nitric oxide, 909, 910–911, 912
air pollution and, 212, 213,
559–560, 906
kinetics of production, 527–533
as ligand, 958
molecular orbitals, 412, 910
as odd-electron molecule,
363, 910
paramagnetism, 412, 910
Nitrite anion, 363, 961
Nitrite salts, 913
Nitrito ligand, 961
Nitrogen, 304, 901–913
in fertilizers, 7, 906, 910, 917
liquid, 904
in living systems, 906
molecular structure, 397, 409,
410, 878, 903
oxyacids of, 911–913
preparation of, 110–111,
879–880
as real gas, 208, 210–211
solid state, 358
Nitrogen cycle, 906
Nitrogen dioxide, 909, 911
acidic solution of, 663

A81

in air pollution, 211–213,
906, 922
dimerization of, 579
as odd-electron molecule, 363
reaction kinetics, 527–533,
549–551
Nitrogen ﬁxation, 906
Nitrogen hydrides, 906–909. See
also Ammonia
Nitrogen monoxide. See Nitric
oxide
Nitrogen oxides, 909–911. See
also speciﬁc compounds
in air, 211–213, 906
names of, 64
Nitroglycerin, 904–905
Nitro ligand, 961, 968
Nitrosyl ion, 910–911
Nitrosyl ligand, 958
Nitrous acid, 212, 627–628,
639–640, 913, 922
Nitrous oxide, 909–910, 911, 912.
See also Dinitrogen
monoxide
Nobel, Alfred, 905
Noble gas electron conﬁguration
of covalent compounds, 338
of ionic compounds, 339–340
of ions, 341–342, 875–876
in Lewis structures, 354,
355, 356
Noble gases (Group 8A), 55,
931–933. See also speciﬁc
gases
freezing points, 428
inside buckyballs, 80–81
intermolecular forces, 428–429
ionization energies, 310
solid state, 436, 458
Noble metals, 814, 815, 821,
824, 945
Nodes
of orbitals, 295
of standing wave, 291
Nonelectrolytes, 129, 130, 133, 149
Nonideal solutions, 502–504
Nonmetals, 55, 315–316, 875–876
anions of, 55, 315, 876
binary covalent compounds of,
63–65
bonding by, 338–339
oxidation of metals by,
316–317
preparation of, 879–880
transition metal compounds
of, 945
Nonpolar molecules, 129, 428,
429
Nonpolar solvent, 489, 491–492
Nonstoichiometric
compositions, 884
Norepinephrine, 648

A82

Index

Normal boiling point, 466
Normal hydrocarbons, 998, 999
Normality (N), 487, 488
Normal melting point, 466, 467
Novocaine, 649
n-type semiconductor, 450–451,
452, 453
Nuclear atom, 49–50
Nuclear binding energy, 857–859
Nuclear ﬁssion, 843,
859–863, 866
Nuclear fusion, 850–851, 859, 863
Nuclear physics, 864–865
Nuclear reactors, 861–863, 866
Nuclear stability, 841–849,
856–859
Nuclear transformations, 849–852
Nucleic acids, 1036–1040
Nucleons, 841. See also
Neutrons; Protons
Nucleosynthesis, stellar,
850–851, 863
Nucleotides, 1036–1037, 1039
Nucleus, 49–50, 841
Nuclides, 841, 842–844
Nylon, 1017, 1020–1021, 1022
Observations, 5, 6, 7. See also
Measurement
Octahedral complex ions, 956,
960, 961, 966, 967–970
Octahedral holes, 456, 457, 458
Octahedral hybrid orbitals,
399–400, 401, 902, 903
Octahedral structure, 371, 372,
374, 918
Octane rating, 103
Octaves, 300
Octet rule, 355, 356
exceptions to, 358–361
guidelines for, 360
Odd-electron molecules, 363
OIL RIG mnemonic, 160
Oils. See also Petroleum
hydrogenation of, 883, 1007
immiscibility in water, 490
from plants, 262–263
Oil shale, 262–263
Open hearth process, 984–985
Operator, 291
Optical isomerism, 961–965
in sugars, 1031–1032, 1034
Orbital diagrams, 302–304
Orbitals. See Atomic orbitals;
Hybridization; Molecular
orbital (MO) model
Order of reactant, 532
Order of reaction, 535, 536, 538
Ores, 821, 878, 879, 978, 979,
980. See also Metallurgy
Organic chemistry, 997. See also
Hydrocarbons

Orthophosphoric acid. See
Phosphoric acid
Osmium, 51, 949
Osmotic pressure, 508–511, 513
in plants, 1034–1035
Ostwald process, 101, 912–913
Overvoltage, 820
Oxalate ligand, 957, 961
Oxidation. See also Corrosion
aging and, 160–161
deﬁnition of, 159
Oxidation half-reaction, 162–168
Oxidation numbers.
See Oxidation states
Oxidation–reduction (redox)
reactions, 140, 154–168. See
also Electrolysis; Galvanic
cells; Oxidation states
in acidic solution, 162–166
balancing equations for,
162–168
in basic solution, 166–168
in biologic systems, 973, 977
characteristics of, 158–161
deﬁnition of, 154
disproportionation in, 929
electron transfer in, 154,
158–160, 163, 167
equilibrium constants, 807–808
equivalent mass in, 487
between metal and nonmetal,
316–317
in metallurgy, 161–162, 978,
980, 982, 983
Oxidation states, 155–158
compared to charge, 155–156,
157, 363–364
in complex ions, 956, 958, 959
noninteger, 158
rules for, 156
of transition metals, 945,
947–948
Oxide ion, 313, 339–340,
345–346, 663, 876
Oxide minerals, 979, 980
Oxides, 918, 919. See also
Corrosion
acid–base properties, 662–663,
665, 667, 876
of Group 2A metals, 876,
885, 886
Oxidizing agents, 159–160
in electrochemistry, 791, 793
equivalent mass of, 487
in ﬁreworks, 288, 289
Oxyacids, 627–628, 661–662.
See also speciﬁc acids
of halogens, 67, 928–929
of nitrogen, 911–913
of phosphorus, 916–917
of sulfur, 922–923
Oxyanions, 62, 66–67, 928–929

Oxygen, 304, 919
abundance, 878
in biologic systems, 973–979
early research on, 40, 41
liquid, 410, 919
molecular orbital model,
410–411
oxidation states, 156
paramagnetism, 410, 919
preparation of, 879–880
superoxides as source of, 881
Oxygen diﬂuoride, 929
Oxytocin, 1028
Ozone, 413, 919
in smog formation, 212–213,
559–560
of upper atmosphere, 211, 260,
559, 561, 919, 1004
Paint
for corrosion prevention,
814, 815
entropic forces in, 756
pigments in, 4
titanium dioxide in, 950, 951
Palladium, 884, 949, 963
Paper
acid decomposition, 666–667
titanium dioxide in, 950, 951
Paper chromatography, 27
Paracelsus, 39
Paramagnetism, 409–410, 412
of coordination compounds,
946, 955, 968, 976
of nitric oxide, 412, 910
of nitrogen dioxide, 911
of oxygen, 410, 919
Partial charge, 128, 332
Partial ionic character, 346–347
Partial pressures
Dalton’s law of, 194–199, 202
equilibrium and, 586–588,
594–596, 601–603
solubility and, 494–495
Particle accelerators, 57, 83, 302,
849–850, 864
Particle physics, 864–865
Particles, 277
wave nature of, 281,
282–284, 290
Pascal (Pa), 181
Pasteur, Louis, 962
Pathway, 230, 749
Patina, 814, 955
Pauli, Wolfgang, 298
Pauli exclusion principle, 298,
302, 303
Pauling, Linus, 334, 348
Peat bogs, lead in, 51
Peker, Atakan, 449
Penetration effect, 299, 306
Penicillin, 90–91

Pentoses, 1031, 1032
Peptide linkage, 1027
Percent composition, 89–91
Percent dissociation, 641–644
Percent ionic character, 346
Percent yield, 111–112
Perchlorate ion, 929
Perchloric acid, 627, 928
Periodic table, 55–57, 875–876.
See also Elements; Groups
alternate version of, 57,
307–308
ﬁlling of orbitals in, 302–309
history of, 299–301
information contained in,
314–316
ionic radii and, 341
predictions based on, 300, 301
transuranium elements in,
302–303, 851–852
valence electrons in, 304–305,
307, 308
Periods, 57
atomic properties in, 310, 311,
312, 313, 314
transition metal properties
in, 943
Permanganate ion, 953, A18–A19
Peroxide anion, 881
Peroxides, 156, 159, 881, 975
Petroleum, 252–254, 257. See
also Gasoline
air pollution and, 211, 213
dwindling supply, 214, 229
immiscibility in water, 490
Pewter, 443, 892
pH, 631–634. See also Buffered
solutions
at equivalence point, 704,
705, 707
indicators and, 713–716
of polyprotic acids, 651–655
of salt solutions, 655–659
solubility and, 724, 728, 729
of strong acid, 634–635
of strong base, 645
of weak acid, 635–644
of weak base, 647–650
Phase diagrams, 467–471,
504, 506
pH curve, 696
indicators and, 711, 716
strong acid–strong base, 699
strong base–strong acid, 699
weak acid–strong base, 704,
705, 707
weak base–strong acid, 711
Phenol, 1012
Phenolphthalein, 152, 711,
715, 716
Phenyl group, 1009
Pheromones, 1–2, 379

Index
Phlogiston, 40, 41
pH meter, 631, 633, 711, 807
Phosphate rock, 916, 917, 922
Phosphate salts, solubility of,
144, 724
Phosphides, 914
Phosphine, 378, 914
Phosphorescence, 914
Phosphoric acid, 627–628,
650–652, 916–917, 918, 926
Phosphorous acid, 917
Phosphorus, 901–902, 913–918
bonding in, 411–412, 454, 455,
878, 913–915
in fertilizers, 917, 922
halides of, 917–918
oxides of, 94, 915–916
Phosphorus pentachloride
decomposition, 595–596
structure, 360, 373, 397–398,
902, 917–918
Photochemical smog, 213, 906
Photochromic glass, 931
Photoelectric effect, 279–280
Photography, 924, 926
Photons, 278–280, 286–287, 844,
864. See also
Electromagnetic radiation
Photosynthesis, 154, 229, 252,
254, 259
alternative pathways, 84
chlorophyll in, 973
radiocarbon dating and, 853
Photovoltaic cell, 810
Physical changes, 26, 464
Physical states. See States of matter
Pi (␲) bonds, 394–395, 396–397,
402, 1005, 1006, 1008
atomic size and, 447,
877–878, 902
resonance and, 413–414, 415
Piezoelectric substance, 1024
Pig iron, 984, 985
Pigments, 4
Pi (␲) molecular orbitals, 408,
415, 446, 1008
Pipet, 10, 11, 137, 139
pK, 631
pKa
of buffered solution, 689, 690,
691, 692, 693, 694, 695
of indicator, 713–714, 716
Planar structure
bond polarities and, 337
square, 374, 956, 961, 966,
972–973
trigonal, 368, 371, 375–376,
393, 401, 445
Planck, Max, 278, 280, 285
Planck’s constant, 278, 292
Plane-polarized light,
961–962, 1032

Plants. See also Photosynthesis
chemical messengers of, 379
fuel from, 252, 254, 258–260,
262–263
gold in, 40
polysaccharides of, 1034–1036
thermogenic, 238–239
Plastics. See also Polymers
blowing agent for, 908
Plastic sulfur, 921
Plating. See Electroplating
Platinum
in antitumor agents, 963
as catalyst, 559, 949
as electrode, 794, 819
surface reaction on, 546
Platinum group metals, 949
Pleated sheet, 1028–1029
Plum pudding model, 47, 48–49
Plunkett, Roy, 1018
Plutonium, 302, 862–863
p–n junction, 450–451, 452,
454, 810
pOH, 631–632, 633–634, 648
Polar covalent bonds, 332–333
acid strength and, 661
dipole moments and, 335–338
electronegativity and, 334–335
molecular orbitals and, 413
partial ionic character of,
346–347
Polarizability, 428–429, 461
Polarized light, 961–962, 1032
Polar molecules, 128, 129. See
also Dipole moments;
Hydration; Hydrogen
bonding
ammonia as, 336, 907
capillary action and, 429
surface tension and, 429
water as, 128, 332–333, 336
Polar side chains, 1027
Polar solvent, 489, 490,
491–492
Polonium, 433, 918, 924
Polyatomic ions, 55, 62–63, 65,
66–67, 346
Polydentate ligands, 957
Polyelectronic atoms, 298–299
Polyester, 1021
Polyethylene, 1017–1019,
1021–1022
Polymers, 1008, 1016–1025. See
also Carbohydrates; Nucleic
acids; Proteins
entropic forces and, 756
ethylene-based, 1017–1019,
1021–1022
historical development of,
1016–1017
ion-exchange resins, 887
of phosphoric acid, 916

products based on, 7, 23, 449,
814, 892, 1018–1019
properties of, 1022–1025
types of, 1017–1021
Polypeptides, 1027–1028
Polypropylene, 1023–1024
Polyprotic acids, 650–655,
682, A23
Polysaccharides, 1034–1036
Polystyrene, 1024–1025
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 1025
Polyvinylidene diﬂuoride (PVDF),
1024
p orbitals, 294, 295, 296, 299. See
also Pi (␲) bonds
ﬁlling of, 303–304, 305
Poreda, Robert J., 80
Porous disk, 792, 798
Porphyrin, 973, 974
Portland cement, 892
Positional entropy, 754–755, 756,
762–764, 771
Positron production, 844
Post-it Notes, 7
Potassium, 305, 316, 317–318,
880, 881, 882. See also
Alkali metals
Potassium dichromate, 165–166
Potassium ferricyanide, 959
Potassium hydrogen phthalate
(KHP), 153
Potassium hydroxide, 131,
144, 644, 663. See also
Strong bases
Potential difference, 800. See also
Cell potential
Potential energy, 229–230
in bonding, 331, 332
in chemical reaction,
231–232, 749
as internal energy, 232
of nucleus, 841, 856
in quantum mechanics,
291, 298
reaction rates and, 553
Potentiometer, 793, 801, 807
Power plants. See Energy sources
Powers of a number, A3
Precipitate, 140
Precipitation, selective, 727–731,
734–736, 981, 982
Precipitation reactions, 140–145,
724–727
net ionic equation for, 145
stoichiometry of, 147–148
Precipitator, electrostatic, 515
Precision, 12–13, 16, A10,
A11–A13
Predictions, 5, 6, 199–200
Pressure. See also Ideal gas
law; Partial pressures;
Vapor pressure

A83

atmospheric, 179–180, 181, 211
Boyle’s law, 181–184, 186,
189, 200–201
conversion of units, 181, A26
deﬁnition of, 181
in diamond anvil cell, 358
enthalpy and, 235–236
entropy and, 771
in equilibrium expression,
586–588, 594–596, 601–603
equilibrium position and,
607–609
free energy and, 770–773,
774–777
measurement of, 180–181
osmotic, 508–511, 513
phase diagrams and, 467–471
of real gas, 208–211
solubility and, 493–495, 497
in standard state, 246
temperature and, 201
work and, 233–235
Priestley, Joseph, 40, 912
Primary structure, of protein,
1027–1028
Primary valence, 956
Principal quantum number, 293,
299, 308
Printed circuits, 452–453, 454
Probability
entropy and, 751–755, 762–764
mixing and, 491
of nuclear decay, 846
Probability distribution, 292–293,
295, 296, 299
Products, 97–98
calculating mass of, 102–106
in solution, 145–146
Propagation of uncertainties,
A12–A13
Propane, 998
Propyl group, 1000
Proteins, 1025–1031
coordination complexes and,
973, 974, 975, 977
entropic forces and, 756
enzymes, 557, 558, 562–563
erythropoietin, 978–979
ice formation and, 516
molar mass determination, 87
Protein synthesis, 1038–1040
Proton acceptor, 149, 623, 624,
644, 646
Proton donor, 149, 623, 624,
661, 662
Proton-exchange membrane
(PEM), 812
Protons, 49–50, 52, 841, 842–844,
864. See also Hydrogen ions
Proust, Joseph, 41
Pseudo-ﬁrst-order rate law, 547
p–s mixing, 409

A84

Index

p-type semiconductor, 450–451,
452, 453
Pure substance, 25
PV work, 234–235
Pyramidal structure, trigonal, 369,
902, 903, 914, 917
Pyridine, 646
Pyroaurite, 814
Pyroelectric substance, 1024
Pyrolytic cracking, 253
Pyrometallurgy, 981
Pyrophoric substance, 913
Pyrophosphoric acid, 916
Q (ion product), 725, 727
Q (reaction quotient), 593–594,
600, 605, 607
cell potential and, 804–806
free energy change and, 772
Quadratic equations, A7–A10
in acid–base problems,
636–637, 654–655
in equilibrium problems,
601, 602
Qualitative analysis, 729–731,
734–736
Qualitative observations, 5
Quantitative analysis,
spectroscopic, A16–A19
Quantitative observations, 5
Quantization of energy, 278–280,
285–287, 290
Quantum mechanics, 275,
290–296
electron spin in, 296, 298, 303
of hydrogen molecule, 403, 404
of polyelectronic atoms,
298–299
Quantum model, of Bohr,
285–287, 290, 291, 292, 293
Quantum numbers, 293–294, 296,
298, 299, 308
Quarks, 841, 864
Quartz, 329, 446, 447, 878, 946
Racemic mixture, 965
Radial probability distribution,
292–293, 299
Radiation, electromagnetic. See
Electromagnetic radiation
Radiation damage, 847, 863–866
Radii
atomic, 313–314, 876–878,
948–949
ionic, 340–342
Radioactive waste, 866
Radioactivity, 48, 842–843
dating with, 51, 853–855
detection of, 852–853
kinetics of decay, 846–849
medical applications, 847,
855–856

of polonium, cancer and, 918
types of, 843–845
Radiotracers, 855–856
Radium, 309, 885
Radon, 932
Rads, 864
Rainbow, 284–285
Random-coil arrangement, 1029
Random error, 12, A10
Randomness, entropy and,
751, 757
Range, of measurements, A11
Raoult, François, 498
Raoult’s law
for liquid–liquid solutions,
501–504
for nonvolatile solutes, 498–501
Rate
deﬁnition of, 528, 530, 533
instantaneous, 530
Rate constant, 532, 533, 537,
538, 548
Arrhenius equation for,
555–557
half-life and, 542, 545–546
for nuclear decay, 847
Rate-determining step, 550–551
Rate laws, 532–534. See also
Reaction rates
for complex reactions,
546–547, 549
determining form of,
534–538, 548
integrated, 533, 534, 538–547,
546, 548–549
for radioactive decay, 847
reaction mechanisms and,
549–552
summary, 534, 548–549
RBE (relative biological
effectiveness), 865
Reactants, 97–98
calculating mass of, 102–106
limiting, 106–113, 147–148
order of, 532
in solution, 145–146
Reaction mechanisms, 527,
549–552
Reaction order, 535, 536, 538
Reaction quotient (Q), 593–594,
600, 605, 607
cell potential and, 804–806
free energy change and, 772
Reaction rates, 527–532. See also
Rate laws
catalysis and, 557–563
deﬁnition of, 528, 530, 533
equilibrium and, 581–582, 593,
606, 774
mechanisms and, 527, 549–552
model for, 552–557
temperature and, 552–558

thermodynamics and, 527, 593,
605, 749–750, 770,
774, 778
Reactions, 96–97. See also
Acid–base reactions;
Chemical equations;
Oxidation–reduction (redox)
reactions; Precipitation
reactions; Stoichiometry
bond energies and, 351–353, 749
energy change, 231–232
entropy change, 762–766
extent of, 592–593
free energy change, 766–770,
771–777, 802
types of, 140
Reactor core, 861, 862
Real gases, 208–211
Boyle’s law and, 182–184
collisions in, 205
cooling on expansion, 879
ideal gas law and, 187, 200
molar volumes of, 191
Rectiﬁer, 451
Redox reactions. See Oxidation–
reduction (redox) reactions
Red phosphorus, 913–914, 915
Reducing agents, 159–160
alkali metals, 316–318, 881
carbon, 879, 980
in electrochemistry, 791, 793
equivalent mass of, 487
in ﬁreworks, 288
hydrogen, 879, 980
in metallurgy, 980
transition metals, 948
Reduction, 159
at cathode, 792
in metallurgy, 978, 980,
982, 983
Reduction half-reaction, 162–168
Reduction potentials, standard,
794–800, 948, A25
Reﬁning, 978, 980, 985
electroreﬁning, 823–824
Relative solubilities, 721–722
Relativity, special theory of, 280,
856–857
Rem, 865
Representative elements, 307,
314–315, 875–880
abundance, 878–879
atomic radii, 313–314, 876–878
ionization energies, 311
preparation, 879–880
Residual oil, 257
Resonance, 362–367, 375, 377,
413–415
Respiratory chain, 973, 977
Reverse bias, 451, 452
Reverse osmosis, 511
Reverse reaction, rate of, 532, 534

Reversible process, 779
Rhodium, 949
Rhombic sulfur, 920
Ribonucleic acids (RNA),
1036–1037, 1038–1040
Roasting, 161, 606, 980
Rocket fuels, 907–908. See also
Space shuttle
Roman numerals
in complex ion names, 958
in compound names, 59–61, 63,
65, 66
Root mean square velocity,
204–205, 207, 208
Roots
of number, A3
of quadratic equation, A7–A10
Rounding, 15, 16
Rubber, 1017, 1022
Rubidium, 305, 316, 317, 880,
881, 882
Rust, 815, 954. See also
Corrosion
Ruthenium, 949
Rutherford, Ernest, 48–49, 284,
841, 849
Rutile, 950
Salicylic acid, 238, 1015
Salt bridge, 792, 798, 815, 816
Saltlike hydrides, 883–884
Salts. See Ionic compounds (salts)
Sand, 3, 892, 978
Saturated hydrocarbons,
997–1005. See also Methane
Saturated solution, 717
Scale. See Balance
Scandium, 305, 946, 947,
949–950
Scanning tunneling microscope
(STM), 2, 438–439
Scheele, Karl W., 40, 332
Schierholz, Otto, 667
Schmidt, Lanny, 258
Schoenbein, Christian, 1016
Schrödinger, Erwin, 290, 291
Schrödinger equation, 291,
293, 298
Scientiﬁc method, 5–7, 199. See
also Models
Scintillation counter, 852–853
Scoville, Wilbur, 414
Screening electrons. See Shielding
electrons
Scrubbing, 214, 645, 920
Seaborg, Glenn T., 302, 303
Seawater, 26, 511
Secondary structure, of protein,
1028–1029
Secondary valence, 956
Second ionization energy, 309,
311–312

Index
Second law of thermodynamics,
755–756, 762, 779
Second-order reaction, 536,
543–546, 548
Seddon, Kenneth R., 494
Seed oil, 263
See-saw structure, 372
Selective precipitation, 727–731,
734–736
in metallurgy, 981, 982
Selenium, 46–47, 918
Seltzer, 40
Semiconductors, 279, 450–454,
810, 892, 918
Semimetals, 316, 875, 890.
See also Silicon
Semiochemicals, 378–379
Semipermeable membrane, 508,
509–510, 511
Separation of mixtures, 25–27, 196
Shielding electrons, 299, 310,
311, 312, 313
Shotyk, William, 51
Sickle cell anemia, 756, 977
Side chains, 1027
Side reactions, 111
Siderite, 982
Sieve, molecular, 196
Sigma (␴) bonds, 394–395,
396–397, 399, 1005,
1006, 1008
resonance and, 413–414
Sigma (␴) molecular orbitals,
404–405
Signiﬁcant ﬁgures, 13–16
for logarithms, 631, A5
in measurement, 11, A10
Signs, of thermodynamic
quantities, 232–233
Silica, 446–448, 877–878, 905
Silicates, 447, 448
in concrete, 892
Silicon, 46, 47, 446–454, 890,
891, 892
abundance, 878
atomic size, 876–878
in explosives detector, 455
Silicon chip, 47, 452–453
Silver
alloy of, 443, 955
corrosion of, 814, 820, 821
crystal structure, 438–441
naming of compounds, 60
in photochromic glass, 931
in photography, 924, 926
physical properties, 944, 945
plating with, 818, 819, 824
salts of, solubility, 144, 724
Silver, Spencer F., 7
Silver cell, 811
Silver sulﬁde, 814, 820, 821
Single bonds, 351, 352

SI system of units, 8–9, A26
frequency in, 276
pressure in, 181
Slag, 984, 985
Slaked lime. See Calcium
hydroxide
Slightly soluble substance,
143, 144
Slope
of straight line, A6–A7
of tangent, 530–531
Slurry, 214, 257
Smelting, 980
Smog. See Air pollution
Snow, artiﬁcial, 22–23, 184
Soda ash, 645
Sodium, 304, 316–318, 880,
881–882. See also Alkali
metals
production of, 824–825
Sodium carbonate, 645
Sodium chloride
crystal structure, 344, 456,
457–458
electrolysis of liquid, 824–825
electrolysis of solution,
819–820, 825–826
as electrolyte, 130–131, 435
formation from elements, 154,
158, 159, 316
ionic bonding in, 53–55, 330
ion pairing in solution of,
512–513
isotonic solution, 510–511
solubility, 491
Sodium chloride structure, 344
Sodium hydroxide, 131, 144,
644, 645–646. See also
Strong bases
production of, 825–826
standardized solution of, 153
Sodium hypochlorite, 643
Sodium ion, 53, 55, 58
Sodium peroxide, 881
Sodium thiosulfate, 926
Solar energy sources, 810
Solar fusion of hydrogen, 863
Solar radiation, greenhouse effect
and, 255–256
Solder, 443, 892
Solids. See also Crystalline solids;
Glass; Ionic compounds
(salts); Metals
in chemical equations, 98
fundamental properties of, 25,
425, 458
in heterogeneous catalysis,
558–559
in heterogeneous equilibria, 589
positional entropy of, 754,
763–764
in solubility equilibria, 717

solutions of, 485
standard state, 246, 764
types of, 430, 432, 435–436,
458–459
vapor pressure of, 463,
465–466, 467–468
Solubility, 717–721. See also
Precipitation
in acidic solution, 724, 728,
729, 730, 735
in basic solution, 724,
728–729, 730
common ion effect on, 718,
722–724
complex ions and, 734–736
energy considerations in,
488–492
of gases, 493–495, 496
pressure and, 493–495, 497
relative, 721–722
structure effects in, 492–493
temperature and, 495–496, 735
in water, 128–129, 143–144,
490–491
Solubility product (Ksp), 717–724,
725–729, A24
Solubility rules, 143–144
Solute, 129
Solutions. See also Aqueous
solutions; Colligative
properties; Solubility
composition of, 133–140,
485–488
deﬁnition of, 25, 485
dilution of, 137–140
energy of formation, 488–492,
496, 502, 503
entropy of formation, 754
equations for reactions in,
145–146
liquid–liquid, 501–504
nonideal, 502–504
preparation of, 136–137
reaction types in, 140
standard, 136, 152–153
standard state in, 246
stock, 137
types of, 485
vapor pressures of, 497–504
Solvents, 127, 129, 489, 490,
491–492
s orbitals, 291, 292–296, 299
ﬁlling of, 302–303, 305–306
Sottos, Nancy, 1018
Space-ﬁlling model, 52–53
Space shuttle, 105, 257, 813, 908
Special theory of relativity, 280,
856–857
Speciﬁc heat capacity,
237–238, 239
Spectator ions, 145, 146, 149
Spectrochemical series, 968

A85

Spectrophotometer, A16–A17,
A18–A19
Spectroscopy, A16–A19
liquid structure and, 430
Spectrum. See Emission spectrum
Speed. See Rate; Velocity
Spheres, packing of, 436–441,
456–458
Spin, electron, 296, 298, 303
Spinneret, 1017
Splitting of 3d energies, 968–973
Spontaneous ﬁssion, 843
Spontaneous processes, 749–754.
See also Entropy
cell potential and, 799,
802–803
entropy change and, 751,
754–755, 756
free energy and, 759–762, 770,
773–774, 778
rates of, 527
temperature and, 756–762
work and, 778, 801
sp orbitals, 395–397, 401
in alkynes, 1006
in complex ions, 967
sp2 orbitals, 393–395, 401
in alkenes, 1005
in aromatic hydrocarbons, 1008
sp3 orbitals, 391–393, 401
in alkanes, 998
in complex ions, 966
in Group 4A, 890
Sports drinks, 514–515
Square planar structure, 374
of complex ion, 956, 961, 966,
972–973
Square roots, A3
Stability constants, 731–734
Stahl, Georg, 40
Stainless steel, 815–816, 954, 986
Stalactites and stalagmites, 680,
681, 724
Standard atmosphere (atm), 181
Standard deviation, A12
Standard enthalpy of formation,
246–252, 767, A19–A22
Standard free energy change,
766–770, 772–773
equilibrium constant and, 775,
777–778
Standard free energy of formation,
769, 772, A19–A22
Standard hydrogen electrode, 794
Standard reduction potentials,
794–800, 948, A25
Standard solution, 136, 152–153
Standard states, 246
cell potentials and, 795
enthalpy and, 246, 247
entropy and, 764
free energy and, 766

A86

Index

Standard temperature and pressure
(STP), 191
Standing wave, 290–291, 296
Starch, 1034–1035
Stars, 80, 850–851, 863
State function, 230–231
energy as, 231, 342
enthalpy as, 235, 242, 247
entropy as, 764
free energy as, 767
State property. See State function
States of matter, 25, 425, 426
in chemical equation, 98
entropy of, 754
Stationary phase, 27
Staudinger, Hermann, 1017
Steam, 25, 26. See also
Water vapor
Steel, 443
alloying metals in, 443,
815–816, 954, 984, 985, 986
carbon in, 443, 816, 879, 986
composition of various
types, 986
corrosion of, 813, 814–816
galvanized, 815, 928, 955
heat treatment of, 986
plating of, 815, 824, 893
production of, 984–985
from Titanic, 444–445
Stellar nucleosynthesis,
850–851, 863
Stereoisomerism, 960, 961–965
in alkenes, 1006
in sugars, 1031–1032, 1034
Steric factor, 555
Stock solutions, 137
Stoichiometric point. See
Equivalence point
Stoichiometric quantities, 106
Stoichiometry, 102–106
of acid–base reactions,
149–151
average atomic mass in, 79
deﬁnition of, 77
of electrolytic processes,
816–818
of gases, 190–194
with limiting reactant, 106–113,
147–148
of precipitation reactions,
147–148
in solutions, 133
summarized, 104, 113
Straight-chain hydrocarbons,
998, 999
Strong acids, 626, 627, 628
added to buffered solution,
691–692, 693–694
pH calculations, 634–635
reaction with strong base, 149
as strong electrolytes, 131

titration with strong base,
696–699, 705, 716
Strong bases, 644–646
pH calculations, 645
reaction with acid, 149
as strong electrolytes, 131
titration with strong acid, 699
Strong electrolytes, 129,
130–131, 145
Strong-ﬁeld case, 968, 971
Strong force, 864
Strontium, 305, 885, 886
Strontium-90, 847, 865
Structural formula, 52, 53
Structural isomerism, 960–961
in alkanes, 998–1000,
1001–1002
Subcritical ﬁssion reaction, 860
Sublimation, 343, 463, 467–468,
469, 470–471
Subshells, 294
Substitutional alloys, 443
Substitution reactions
of alkanes, 1003
of benzene, 1008–1009
Substrate, 562
Subtraction
in exponential notation, A2–A3
signiﬁcant ﬁgures, 14–15
Successive approximations,
A8–A10
Sucrose, 133, 435, 923, 1034
Sugars, 1031–1034.
See also Sucrose
fermentation of, 263, 891,
1011–1012
in nucleic acids, 1036, 1037
in sports drinks, 514–515
Sulfate ion, Lewis structures,
364–366
Sulfate minerals, 979
Sulfate salts, solubility, 144
Sulﬁdes, 918, 923
Sulﬁde salts, 144, 728–730, 735
Sulﬁtes, 922, 924
Sulfur, 308, 920–924
bonding in, 454, 455, 878,
920–921
in steel, 444
Sulfur dioxide, 921, 922
acid rain and, 212–214
catalytic oxidation of, 559
from coal burning, 213–214, 254
dissolved in water, 663
from metallurgy, 980, 981
scrubbing of, 214, 645, 920
VSEPR model, 376–377
Sulfur hexaﬂuoride, 359–360, 399
Sulfuric acid, 922–923
in acid rain, 212–213, 214,
559, 922
in cleaning solution, 953

as dehydrating agent, 913,
922–923
equilibrium calculations,
653–655
in lead storage battery, 809–810
molecular structure, 663
as strong acid, 131, 627, 653
from sulfur trioxide, 663,
665, 922
Sulfur monoxide, 921
Sulfurous acid, 922
Sulfur trioxide, 921–922
air pollution and, 214, 559
bond polarities, 337–338
reaction with water, 663, 665
Sun. See Solar energy sources
Sunglasses, automatic, 931
Supercooled water, 466, 516
Supercritical ﬁssion reaction,
860, 862
Superheated liquid, 466
Supernova explosion, 851
Superoxide dismutase (SOD),
160–161
Superoxides, 881
Superphosphate of lime, 917
Superplasticizers, 892
Surface alloys, 816
Surfaces, 438–439, 546, 558–559
Surface tension, 429, 951
Surroundings, 231, 755, 757–759,
762, 779
Suspensions, 514–515
Swartzentruber, Brian, 438
Syndiotactic chain, 1023
Syngas, 256–257
System, 231, 755, 762, 779, 800
Systematic error, 12, 13, A10
Taconite, 982
Tangent line, 530–531
Tanning lotions, 1032–1033
Tantalum, 949
Tarnish, 814, 820, 821
Technetium-99m, 847, 856
Teeth, 159, 717, 720, 975
Teﬂon, 1018
Tellurium, 918
Temperature. See also Heat
absolute zero of, 185, 764
altitude and, 211
autoionization and, 631
catalysis and, 557–558
changes of state and, 463–466
Charles’s law and, 184–185,
186, 189, 201
entropy and, 764
equilibrium constant and, 605,
609–610, 777–778
heat and, 230
heat capacity and, 237–238
as intensive property, 238

in kinetic molecular theory,
200–202, 203–206, A16
measurement of, 19–23
phase diagrams and, 467–471,
504, 506
pressure and, 201
pyroelectric material and, 1024
reaction rate and, 552–558
of real gas, 208–210
solubility and, 495–496, 735
spontaneity and, 756–762
vapor pressure and, 461–463,
465–466
Tempering, of steel, 986
Termolecular step, 550
Tertiary structure, of protein, 1030
Tetraethyl lead, 253–254, 893
Tetrahedral complex ions, 956,
966, 970–972
Tetrahedral holes, 456–457
Tetrahedral hybrid orbitals,
391–393, 401, 402
in alkanes, 998
in Group 5A cations, 902,
903, 918
in Group 4A elements, 890
Tetrahedral structure, 368,
369–370, 371
bond polarities and, 337
distorted, 378
Tetrahedron, 347
Tetraphosphorus decoxide, 916
Tetraphosphorus trisulﬁde, 915
Tetrathionate ion, 924
Thallium, 856, 888, 890
Theoretical yield, 111, 112
Theory, 6, 7, 199. See also
Models
Thermal conductivity, 436, 441,
442, 944
Thermal energy, 757. See also Heat
Thermal pollution, 496
Thermite reaction, 251
Thermodynamics, 232
absolute values of functions in,
763–764
compared to kinetics, 527, 593,
605, 749–750, 770,
774, 778
ﬁrst law, 232, 233, 749
second law, 755–756, 762, 779
sign convention in, 232–233
third law, 764
Thermodynamic stability, of
nucleus, 841, 856–859
Thermogenic plants, 238–239
Thermophotovoltaics (TPV),
810–811
Thermoplastic polymers, 1017,
1021, 1022
Thermoset polymer, 1017
Thiocyanate, 40, 961

Index
Thiosulfate ion, 924, 926
Third law of thermodynamics, 764
Thomson, J. J., 45–47, 48, 284
Three-center bonds, 888
Thresh, L. T., 414
Threshold model, of radiation
damage, 866
Thundat, Thomas, 455
Thymol blue, 715, 716
Tin, 879, 890, 891, 892–893, 894
plated on steel, 815, 824, 893
Tin disease, 892
Titanic, 444–445
Titanium, 305, 946, 947, 950
in bicycles, 952–953
on ships’ hulls, 816
Titanium dioxide, 950, 951
Titrant, 151, 152, 696
Titration curve. See pH curve
Titrations. See Acid–base titrations
Tooth. See Teeth
Torr, 181
Torricelli, Evangelista, 180, 181
Trailing zeros, 13, 14
Transfer pipet, 137
Transfer RNA (tRNA), 1039, 1040
trans isomer, 961, 963, 965, 1006
Transistors, 452–453, 892
Transition metals, 55, 875. See
also Complex ions
3d (ﬁrst-row), 946–948,
949–955, 973
4d (second-row), 948–949
5d (third-row), 948–949
abundance, 878–879
binary ionic compounds of,
60, 61, 66
in biologic systems, 973–977
electron conﬁgurations,
305–306, 308, 315, 946–947
in gems, 970–971
general properties, 943–946
interstitial hydrides of, 884–885
ionization energies, 948
oxidation states, 945, 947–948
reducing ability, 948
strategic importance of, 943
Transition state, 553
Transmittance, A17
Transuranium elements, 302–303,
851–852
Triads, 300
Trigonal bipyramidal structure,
371–372, 401, 402–403, 902,
903, 917
Trigonal holes, 456
Trigonal planar structure, 368,
371, 375–376, 393, 401, 445
Trigonal pyramidal structure, 369,
902, 903, 914–915, 917
Triiodide ion, 361, 375, 398–399
Trinitrotoluene (TNT), 905

Triple bonds, 351, 352, 376,
396–397, 401–402
of nitrogen, 397, 410, 878, 903
Triple phosphate, 917
Triple point, 468, 470
Tripolyphosphoric acid, 916
Triprotic acid, 650–652
Troposphere, 211
Tsapatsis, Michael, 196
T-shaped structure, 372
Tungsten, 946
Tyndall effect, 514
Uhlenback, George, 296
Ultraviolet radiation, 276
chlorination reactions and, 1003
hydrogen–chlorine cannon
and, 926
ozone layer and, 211, 561, 919
titanium dioxide and, 951
Unbranched hydrocarbons,
998, 999
Uncertain digit, 11
Uncertainty in measurement,
10–13, 16, A10–A13
Uncertainty principle,
291–292, 296
Unidentate ligand, 956, 958
Unimolecular step, 550
Unit cells, 432
closest packing and, 436–441,
456–458
Unit factor method, 16–19
Units of measurement, 5, 8–10
conversions, 16–19, A26
in equilibrium constant, 583, 584
for pressure, 180–181
for temperature, 19–23
Universal gas constant (R), 187,
204–205
Unsaturated hydrocarbons,
997–998, 1004, 1005–1010.
See also Ethylene
hydrogenation of, 558–559,
883, 998, 1007
Uranium
ﬁssion of, 859–860,
861–862, 866
geologic dating with, 854–855
metallurgy of, 982
radioactive decay of, 48, 843,
844, 845
Urea, 997
Valence electrons, 304–305, 307.
See also Lewis structures
chemical properties and,
308, 314
ionization energies and,
309–310
of metal, 441–442
of semiconductor, 450

of stable compound, 338–339
Valence shell electron-pair
repulsion model. See
VSEPR model
Vanadium, 305, 946, 947,
950–951
Vanadium steel, 950
van der Waals, Johannes, 208
van der Waals equation, 210–211
van Gastel, Raoul, 438
van’t Hoff, J. H., 512
van’t Hoff factor (i), 512–513
Vapor, deﬁnition of, 459
Vaporization, 459
enthalpy change, 425, 426, 459,
461–463
entropy change, 756–757
free energy change, 761–762
of water, 425, 756–757
Vapor pressure, 459–463
changes of state and, 465–466
phase diagram and, 467–468,
469, 504
of solids, 463, 465–466,
467–468
of solutions, 497–504, 506
of superheated liquid, 466
temperature dependence of,
461–463, 465–466
of water, 198, 461–462,
463, 465
Vasopressin, 1028
Velocity
distribution of, in gas, 205–206,
553–554
kinetic energy and, 203, 230
in kinetic molecular theory, 203,
204–206, 207, A13–A16
root mean square, 204–205,
207, 208
Viscosity, 429–430, 431, 1023
Visible light. See Light
Vitamin E, 160
Vitamins, solubility, 492–493
Volatile liquids, 460
Volt (V), 793, 800
Voltaic cells. See Galvanic cells
Voltmeter, 793, 801
Volume
density and, 24
enthalpy and, 235–236
equilibrium position and,
607–609
measurement of, 9, 10–13
molar, of ideal gas, 190–191
molarity and, 133–140
moles of gas and, 186, 187, 202
pressure of gas and, 181–184,
200–201
states of matter and, 25
temperature of gas and,
184–185, 201

A87

units of, 9, 16, A26
work and, 233–235
Volumetric analysis, 151
Volumetric ﬂask, 10, 136,
137, 139
Volumetric pipet, 137
VSEPR model, 354, 367–378
complex ions and, 966
evaluation of, 377–378
Group 5A elements and,
902, 903
Lewis structures in, 369, 377
in localized electron model,
391, 400
lone pairs in, 370–371, 375,
376–377
multiple bonds and, 375–376
names of structures in, 372–373
with no central atom, 377
resonance and, 375, 377
steps in, 369
summary of, 377
V-shaped structure, 371, 372,
376–377
Vulcanization, 1017
Waage, Peter, 582
Walsh, William, 893
Water, 3–4. See also Aqueous
solutions; Hydration; Ice;
Solubility
as acid, 629, 646
as amphoteric substance,
629–631
autoionization of, 629–631,
635, 646
as base, 623–624, 626, 627,
629, 657
boiling point, 427, 464, 465,
466, 469
bonds in, 127–128
capillary action of, 429
changes of state, 26, 425, 426
cooling by, 459, 514
as covalent hydride, 884
density of, 425, 426, 469
desalination of, 26, 511
electrolysis of, 3–4, 27, 258,
809–810, 818–819, 883
entropy of, 765–766
heating curve, 463–464
hydrogen bonding in, 426–427,
454, 456, 459, 461, 464, 490,
491, 884
Lewis structure, 355–356
as ligand, 958, 968
meniscus of, 429
naming of, 64
in natural mixtures, 26
as nonelectrolyte, 149
phase diagram, 467–469,
504, 506

A88

Index

Water (continued)
as polar molecule, 128,
332–333, 336
puriﬁcation of, 919
softening of, 645, 887
as solvent, 128–129, 143–144,
490–491
states of, 25, 26, 425, 426
supercooled, 466, 516
vaporization of, 459,
756–757
vapor pressure, 198, 461–462,
463, 465
VSEPR model, 369–370
Water pollution, 156–157
Waters of hydration, 213
Water-soluble vitamins, 492, 493
Water vapor, 425, 426, 464. See
also Vapor pressure, of water
atmospheric, 255
condensation of, 179–180
on phase diagram, 467–468,
469, 504
Wave function, 291, 292–293.
See also Atomic orbitals;
Molecular orbital
(MO) model
of molecular orbital, 404
Wavelength
of electromagnetic wave,
275–276, 277
of particle, 281, 282–284

Wave mechanics. See Quantum
mechanics
Waves, 275–276, 277
diffraction of, 281–282,
432–434
interference of, 282, 432
particles and, 280–281,
282–284, 290
standing, 290–291
Weak acids, 627–628
in buffered solutions, 684–686,
687–690, 692–696
carboxylic, 1014–1015
with common ion, 681–683
conjugate base of, 627, 656
deﬁnition of, 627
equilibrium problems,
635–644
indicators, 711–716
Ka calculation, 643–644,
707–709
mixtures of, 639–641
percent dissociation, 641–644
pH calculations, 635–644
reaction with strong base, 149
salts as, 657–659
titration with strong base,
153–154, 700–709, 716
as weak electrolytes, 131–132
Weak bases, 646–650
in buffered solutions, 684, 686,
690–693

with common ion, 682
conjugate acid of, 646, 658
salts as, 656–657
strengths of, 628–629, 657
titration with strong acid,
709–711
as weak electrolytes,
132–133
Weak electrolytes, 129–130,
131–133
Weak-ﬁeld case, 968, 971
Weak force, 864
Weight, 9–10, 11, 12
atomic, 44, 79
molecular, 86, 193
Weight percent, 89, 485
Wentorf, Robert H., Jr., 470
Werner, Alfred, 956, 960
Wet process, 916
White, Scott, 1018
White phosphorus, 454, 455, 878,
913, 914, 915, 916
White tin, 892
Wind power, 258–259
Wöhler, Friedrich, 997
Wood, as energy source,
252, 253
Work
deﬁnition of, 230
electrochemical, 791, 793,
800–801, 816
energy and, 229, 230, 231

free energy and, 778–779
by gas, 233–235
internal energy and, 232
sign of, 233, 800–801
Xenon, 932–933
Xenon diﬂuoride, 402–403, 933
Xenon tetraﬂuoride
structure, 374, 400, 933
synthesis, 243–244, 932
Xenon trioxide, 366, 932, 933
X-ray diffraction, 281–282,
432–434
Yield, 111–112
Z (atomic number), 50, 52,
55, 841, 842
Zero-order reaction, 546
Zeros, in calculations, 13, 14
Ziegler, Karl, 1022
Ziegler-Natta catalyst,
1022, 1024
Zinc, 305, 947, 955
in galvanized steel,
815, 955
metallurgy of, 982
naming of compounds, 60
Zirconium, 949
Zone of stability, 842, 844
Zone reﬁning, 980
Zuo-Fen Zhang, 889

Periodic Table of the Elements
Noble
gases

Alkaline
1 earth metals

Halogens 18
8A

Alkali metals

1A
1

2

H
1.008

He
4.003

2

13

14

15

16

17

2A

3A

4A

5A

6A

7A

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Li
6.941

Be
9.012

B
10.81

C
12.01

N
14.01

O
16.00

F
19.00

Ne
20.18

13

14

15

16

17

18

Al
26.98

Si
28.09

P
30.97

S
32.07

Cl
35.45

Ar
39.95

11

12

Na
22.99

Mg
24.31

3

4

5

6

7
8
Transition metals

9

10

11

12

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

K
39.10

Ca
40.08

Sc
44.96

Ti
47.88

V
50.94

Cr
52.00

Mn
54.94

Fe
55.85

Co
58.93

Ni
58.69

Cu
63.55

Zn
65.38

Ga
69.72

Ge
72.59

As
74.92

Se
78.96

Br
79.90

Kr
83.80

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

Rb
85.47

Sr
87.62

Y
88.91

Zr
91.22

Nb
92.91

Mo
95.94

Tc
(98)

Ru
101.1

Rh
102.9

Pd
106.4

Ag
107.9

Cd
112.4

In
114.8

Sn
118.7

Sb
121.8

Te
127.6

I
126.9

Xe
131.3

55

56

57

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

Cs
132.9

Ba
137.3

La*
138.9

Hf
178.5

Ta
180.9

W
183.9

Re
186.2

Os
190.2

Ir
192.2

Pt
195.1

Au
197.0

Hg
200.6

Tl
204.4

Pb
207.2

Bi
209.0

Po
(209)

At
(210)

Rn
(222)

87

88

89

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

Fr
(223)

Ra
226

Ac†
(227)

Rf
(261)

Db
(262)

Sg
(263)

Bh
(264)

Hs
(265)

Mt
(268)

Ds
(271)

Rg
(272)

Uub

Uut

Uuq

Uup

metals

nonmetals

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

*Lanthanides

Ce
140.1

Pr
140.9

Nd
144.2

Pm
(145)

Sm
150.4

Eu
152.0

Gd
157.3

Tb
158.9

Dy
162.5

Ho
164.9

Er
167.3

Tm
168.9

Yb
173.0

Lu
175.0

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

†

Th
232.0

Pa
(231)

U
238.0

Np
(237)

Pu
(244)

Am
(243)

Cm
(247)

Bk
(247)

Cf
(251)

Es
(252)

Fm
(257)

Md
(258)

No
(259)

Lr
(260)

Actinides

Group numbers 1–18 represent the system recommended by the International Union
of Pure and Applied Chemistry.

Table of Atomic Masses*
Element
Actinium
Aluminum
Americium
Antimony
Argon
Arsenic
Astatine
Barium
Berkelium
Beryllium
Bismuth
Bohrium
Boron
Bromine
Cadmium
Calcium
Californium
Carbon
Cerium
Cesium
Chlorine
Chromium
Cobalt
Copper
Curium
Darmstadtium
Dubnium
Dysprosium
Einsteinium
Erbium
Europium
Fermium
Fluorine
Francium
Gadolinium
Gallium
Germanium

Symbol

Atomic
Number

Atomic
Mass

Element

Ac
Al
Am
Sb
Ar
As
At
Ba
Bk
Be
Bi
Bh
B
Br
Cd
Ca
Cf
C
Ce
Cs
Cl
Cr
Co
Cu
Cm
Ds
Db
Dy
Es
Er
Eu
Fm
F
Fr
Gd
Ga
Ge

89
13
95
51
18
33
85
56
97
4
83
107
5
35
48
20
98
6
58
55
17
24
27
29
96
110
105
66
99
68
63
100
9
87
64
31
32

[227]§
26.98
[243]
121.8
39.95
74.92
[210]
137.3
[247]
9.012
209.0
[264]
10.81
79.90
112.4
40.08
[251]
12.01
140.1
132.90
35.45
52.00
58.93
63.55
[247]
[271]
[262]
162.5
[252]
167.3
152.0
[257]
19.00
[223]
157.3
69.72
72.59

Gold
Hafnium
Hassium
Helium
Holmium
Hydrogen
Indium
Iodine
Iridium
Iron
Krypton
Lanthanum
Lawrencium
Lead
Lithium
Lutetium
Magnesium
Manganese
Meitnerium
Mendelevium
Mercury
Molybdenum
Neodymium
Neon
Neptunium
Nickel
Niobium
Nitrogen
Nobelium
Osmium
Oxygen
Palladium
Phosphorus
Platinum
Plutonium
Polonium
Potassium

*The values given here are to four signiﬁcant ﬁgures where possible.

§

Symbol

Atomic
Number

Au
Hf
Hs
He
Ho
H
In
I
Ir
Fe
Kr
La
Lr
Pb
Li
Lu
Mg
Mn
Mt
Md
Hg
Mo
Nd
Ne
Np
Ni
Nb
N
No
Os
O
Pd
P
Pt
Pu
Po
K

79
72
108
2
67
1
49
53
77
26
36
57
103
82
3
71
12
25
109
101
80
42
60
10
93
28
41
7
102
76
8
46
15
78
94
84
19

Atomic
Mass

Element

197.0
178.5
[265]
4.003
164.9
1.008
114.8
126.9
192.2
55.85
83.80
138.9
[260]
207.2
6.9419
175.0
24.31
54.94
[268]
[258]
200.6
95.94
144.2
20.18
[237]
58.69
92.91
14.01
[259]
190.2
16.00
106.4
30.97
195.1
[244]
[209]
39.10

Praseodymium
Promethium
Protactinium
Radium
Radon
Rhenium
Rhodium
Roentgenium
Rubidium
Ruthenium
Rutherfordium
Samarium
Scandium
Seaborgium
Selenium
Silicon
Silver
Sodium
Strontium
Sulfur
Tantalum
Technetium
Tellurium
Terbium
Thallium
Thorium
Thulium
Tin
Titanium
Tungsten
Uranium
Vanadium
Xenon
Ytterbium
Yttrium
Zinc
Zirconium

A value given in parentheses denotes the mass of the longest-lived isotope.

Symbol

Atomic
Number

Atomic
Mass

Pr
Pm
Pa
Ra
Rn
Re
Rh
Rg
Rb
Ru
Rf
Sm
Sc
Sg
Se
Si
Ag
Na
Sr
S
Ta
Tc
Te
Tb
Tl
Th
Tm
Sn
Ti
W
U
V
Xe
Yb
Y
Zn
Zr

59
61
91
88
86
75
45
111
37
44
104
62
21
106
34
14
47
11
38
16
73
43
52
65
81
90
69
50
22
74
92
23
54
70
39
30
40

140.9
[145]
[231]
226
[222]
186.2
102.9
[272]
85.47
101.1
[261]
150.4
44.96
[263]
78.96
28.09
107.9
22.99
87.62
32.07
180.9
[98]
127.6
158.9
204.4
232.0
168.9
118.7
47.88
183.9
238.0
50.94
131.3
173.0
88.91
65.38
91.22

Page Numbers of Some Important Tables
Bond Energies

351

Electron Conﬁgurations of the Elements

307

Ionization Constants of Acids and Bases

628, 647, 651, A24–A25

Reduction Potentials

796, A26

Solubility Products

718, A25

Thermodynamic Data

A21–A23

Vapor Pressures of Water

461

Physical Constants
Constant
Atomic mass unit

Symbol
amu

Value
1.66054  1027 kg

Avogadro’s number

N

6.02214  1023 mol1

Bohr radius

a0

5.292  1011 m

Boltzmann constant

k

1.38066  1023 J/K

Charge of an electron

e

1.60218  1019 C

Faraday constant

F

96,485 C/mol

Gas constant

R

8.31451 J/K  mol
0.08206 L  atm/K  mol

Mass of an electron

me

9.10939  1031 kg
5.48580  104 amu

Mass of a neutron

mn

1.67493  1027 kg
1.00866 amu

Mass of a proton

mp

1.67262  1027 kg
1.00728 amu

Planck’s constant

h

6.62608  1034 J  s

Speed of light

c

2.99792458  108 m/s

